<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>
  INTRODUCTION
</h2>
<p>
  Dead Souls, first published in 1842, is the great prose classic of Russia.
  That amazing institution, &ldquo;the Russian novel,&rdquo; not only began its career
  with this unfinished masterpiece by Nikolai Vasil&rsquo;evich Gogol, but
  practically all the Russian masterpieces that have come since have grown
  out of it, like the limbs of a single tree. Dostoieffsky goes so far as to
  bestow this tribute upon an earlier work by the same author, a short story
  entitled The Cloak; this idea has been wittily expressed by another
  compatriot, who says: &ldquo;We have all issued out of Gogol&rsquo;s Cloak.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Dead Souls, which bears the word &ldquo;Poem&rdquo; upon the title page of the
  original, has been generally compared to Don Quixote and to the Pickwick
  Papers, while E. M. Vogue places its author somewhere between Cervantes
  and Le Sage. However considerable the influences of Cervantes and Dickens
  may have been&mdash;the first in the matter of structure, the other in
  background, humour, and detail of characterisation&mdash;the predominating
  and distinguishing quality of the work is undeniably something foreign to
  both and quite peculiar to itself; something which, for want of a better
  term, might be called the quality of the Russian soul. The English reader
  familiar with the works of Dostoieffsky, Turgenev, and Tolstoi, need
  hardly be told what this implies; it might be defined in the words of the
  French critic just named as &ldquo;a tendency to pity.&rdquo; One might indeed go
  further and say that it implies a certain tolerance of one&rsquo;s characters
  even though they be, in the conventional sense, knaves, products, as the
  case might be, of conditions or circumstance, which after all is the thing
  to be criticised and not the man. But pity and tolerance are rare in
  satire, even in clash with it, producing in the result a deep sense of
  tragic humour. It is this that makes of Dead Souls a unique work,
  peculiarly Gogolian, peculiarly Russian, and distinct from its author&rsquo;s
  Spanish and English masters.
</p>
<p>
  Still more profound are the contradictions to be seen in the author&rsquo;s
  personal character; and unfortunately they prevented him from completing
  his work. The trouble is that he made his art out of life, and when in his
  final years he carried his struggle, as Tolstoi did later, back into life,
  he repented of all he had written, and in the frenzy of a wakeful night
  burned all his manuscripts, including the second part of Dead Souls, only
  fragments of which were saved. There was yet a third part to be written.
  Indeed, the second part had been written and burned twice. Accounts differ
  as to why he had burned it finally. Religious remorse, fury at adverse
  criticism, and despair at not reaching ideal perfection are among the
  reasons given. Again it is said that he had destroyed the manuscript with
  the others inadvertently.
</p>
<p>
  The poet Pushkin, who said of Gogol that &ldquo;behind his laughter you feel the
  unseen tears,&rdquo; was his chief friend and inspirer. It was he who suggested
  the plot of Dead Souls as well as the plot of the earlier work The
  Revisor, which is almost the only comedy in Russian. The importance of
  both is their introduction of the social element in Russian literature, as
  Prince Kropotkin points out. Both hold up the mirror to Russian
  officialdom and the effects it has produced on the national character. The
  plot of Dead Souls is simple enough, and is said to have been suggested by
  an actual episode.
</p>
<p>
  It was the day of serfdom in Russia, and a man&rsquo;s standing was often judged
  by the numbers of &ldquo;souls&rdquo; he possessed. There was a periodical census of
  serfs, say once every ten or twenty years. This being the case, an owner
  had to pay a tax on every &ldquo;soul&rdquo; registered at the last census, though
  some of the serfs might have died in the meantime. Nevertheless, the
  system had its material advantages, inasmuch as an owner might borrow
  money from a bank on the &ldquo;dead souls&rdquo; no less than on the living ones. The
  plan of Chichikov, Gogol&rsquo;s hero-villain, was therefore to make a journey
  through Russia and buy up the &ldquo;dead souls,&rdquo; at reduced rates of course,
  saving their owners the government tax, and acquiring for himself a list
  of fictitious serfs, which he meant to mortgage to a bank for a
  considerable sum. With this money he would buy an estate and some real
  life serfs, and make the beginning of a fortune.
</p>
<p>
  Obviously, this plot, which is really no plot at all but merely a ruse to
  enable Chichikov to go across Russia in a troika, with Selifan the
  coachman as a sort of Russian Sancho Panza, gives Gogol a magnificent
  opportunity to reveal his genius as a painter of Russian panorama, peopled
  with characteristic native types commonplace enough but drawn in comic
  relief. &ldquo;The comic,&rdquo; explained the author yet at the beginning of his
  career, &ldquo;is hidden everywhere, only living in the midst of it we are not
  conscious of it; but if the artist brings it into his art, on the stage
  say, we shall roll about with laughter and only wonder we did not notice
  it before.&rdquo; But the comic in Dead Souls is merely external. Let us see how
  Pushkin, who loved to laugh, regarded the work. As Gogol read it aloud to
  him from the manuscript the poet grew more and more gloomy and at last
  cried out: &ldquo;God! What a sad country Russia is!&rdquo; And later he said of it:
  &ldquo;Gogol invents nothing; it is the simple truth, the terrible truth.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The work on one hand was received as nothing less than an exposure of all
  Russia&mdash;what would foreigners think of it? The liberal elements,
  however, the critical Belinsky among them, welcomed it as a revelation, as
  an omen of a freer future. Gogol, who had meant to do a service to Russia
  and not to heap ridicule upon her, took the criticisms of the Slavophiles
  to heart; and he palliated his critics by promising to bring about in the
  succeeding parts of his novel the redemption of Chichikov and the other
  &ldquo;knaves and blockheads.&rdquo; But the &ldquo;Westerner&rdquo; Belinsky and others of the
  liberal camp were mistrustful. It was about this time (1847) that Gogol
  published his Correspondence with Friends, and aroused a literary
  controversy that is alive to this day. Tolstoi is to be found among his
  apologists.
</p>
<p>
  Opinions as to the actual significance of Gogol&rsquo;s masterpiece differ. Some
  consider the author a realist who has drawn with meticulous detail a
  picture of Russia; others, Merejkovsky among them, see in him a great
  symbolist; the very title Dead Souls is taken to describe the living of
  Russia as well as its dead. Chichikov himself is now generally regarded as
  a universal character. We find an American professor, William Lyon Phelps
  <a href="#linknote-1" name="linknoteref-1" id="linknoteref-1"><small>1</small></a>,
  of Yale, holding the opinion that &ldquo;no one can travel far in America
  without meeting scores of Chichikovs; indeed, he is an accurate portrait
  of the American promoter, of the successful commercial traveller whose
  success depends entirely not on the real value and usefulness of his
  stock-in-trade, but on his knowledge of human nature and of the persuasive
  power of his tongue.&rdquo; This is also the opinion held by Prince Kropotkin <a
  href="#linknote-2" name="linknoteref-2" id="linknoteref-2"><small>2</small></a>,
  who says: &ldquo;Chichikov may buy dead souls, or railway shares, or he may
  collect funds for some charitable institution, or look for a position in a
  bank, but he is an immortal international type; we meet him everywhere; he
  is of all lands and of all times; he but takes different forms to suit the
  requirements of nationality and time.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Again, the work bears an interesting relation to Gogol himself. A
  romantic, writing of realities, he was appalled at the commonplaces of
  life, at finding no outlet for his love of colour derived from his Cossack
  ancestry. He realised that he had drawn a host of &ldquo;heroes,&rdquo; &ldquo;one more
  commonplace than another, that there was not a single palliating
  circumstance, that there was not a single place where the reader might
  find pause to rest and to console himself, and that when he had finished
  the book it was as though he had walked out of an oppressive cellar into
  the open air.&rdquo; He felt perhaps inward need to redeem Chichikov; in
  Merejkovsky&rsquo;s opinion he really wanted to save his own soul, but had
  succeeded only in losing it. His last years were spent morbidly; he
  suffered torments and ran from place to place like one hunted; but really
  always running from himself. Rome was his favourite refuge, and he
  returned to it again and again. In 1848, he made a pilgrimage to the Holy
  Land, but he could find no peace for his soul. Something of this mood had
  reflected itself even much earlier in the Memoirs of a Madman: &ldquo;Oh, little
  mother, save your poor son! Look how they are tormenting him.... There&rsquo;s
  no place for him on earth! He&rsquo;s being driven!... Oh, little mother, take
  pity on thy poor child.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  All the contradictions of Gogol&rsquo;s character are not to be disposed of in a
  brief essay. Such a strange combination of the tragic and the comic was
  truly seldom seen in one man. He, for one, realised that &ldquo;it is dangerous
  to jest with laughter.&rdquo; &ldquo;Everything that I laughed at became sad.&rdquo; &ldquo;And
  terrible,&rdquo; adds Merejkovsky. But earlier his humour was lighter, less
  tinged with the tragic; in those days Pushkin never failed to be amused by
  what Gogol had brought to read to him. Even Revizor (1835), with its
  tragic undercurrent, was a trifle compared to Dead Souls, so that one is
  not astonished to hear that not only did the Tsar, Nicholas I, give
  permission to have it acted, in spite of its being a criticism of official
  rottenness, but laughed uproariously, and led the applause. Moreover, he
  gave Gogol a grant of money, and asked that its source should not be
  revealed to the author lest &ldquo;he might feel obliged to write from the
  official point of view.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Gogol was born at Sorotchinetz, Little Russia, in March 1809. He left
  college at nineteen and went to St. Petersburg, where he secured a
  position as copying clerk in a government department. He did not keep his
  position long, yet long enough to store away in his mind a number of
  bureaucratic types which proved useful later. He quite suddenly started
  for America with money given to him by his mother for another purpose, but
  when he got as far as Lubeck he turned back. He then wanted to become an
  actor, but his voice proved not strong enough. Later he wrote a poem which
  was unkindly received. As the copies remained unsold, he gathered them all
  up at the various shops and burned them in his room.
</p>
<p>
  His next effort, Evenings at the Farm of Dikanka (1831) was more
  successful. It was a series of gay and colourful pictures of Ukraine, the
  land he knew and loved, and if he is occasionally a little over romantic
  here and there, he also achieves some beautifully lyrical passages. Then
  came another even finer series called Mirgorod, which won the admiration
  of Pushkin. Next he planned a &ldquo;History of Little Russia&rdquo; and a &ldquo;History of
  the Middle Ages,&rdquo; this last work to be in eight or nine volumes. The
  result of all this study was a beautiful and short Homeric epic in prose,
  called Taras Bulba. His appointment to a professorship in history was a
  ridiculous episode in his life. After a brilliant first lecture, in which
  he had evidently said all he had to say, he settled to a life of boredom
  for himself and his pupils. When he resigned he said joyously: &ldquo;I am once
  more a free Cossack.&rdquo; Between 1834 and 1835 he produced a new series of
  stories, including his famous Cloak, which may be regarded as the
  legitimate beginning of the Russian novel.
</p>
<p>
  Gogol knew little about women, who played an equally minor role in his
  life and in his books. This may be partly because his personal appearance
  was not prepossessing. He is described by a contemporary as &ldquo;a little man
  with legs too short for his body. He walked crookedly; he was clumsy,
  ill-dressed, and rather ridiculous-looking, with his long lock of hair
  flapping on his forehead, and his large prominent nose.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  From 1835 Gogol spent almost his entire time abroad; some strange unrest&mdash;possibly
  his Cossack blood&mdash;possessed him like a demon, and he never stopped
  anywhere very long. After his pilgrimage in 1848 to Jerusalem, he returned
  to Moscow, his entire possessions in a little bag; these consisted of
  pamphlets, critiques, and newspaper articles mostly inimical to himself.
  He wandered about with these from house to house. Everything he had of
  value he gave away to the poor. He ceased work entirely. According to all
  accounts he spent his last days in praying and fasting. Visions came to
  him. His death, which came in 1852, was extremely fantastic. His last
  words, uttered in a loud frenzy, were: &ldquo;A ladder! Quick, a ladder!&rdquo; This
  call for a ladder&mdash;&ldquo;a spiritual ladder,&rdquo; in the words of Merejkovsky&mdash;had
  been made on an earlier occasion by a certain Russian saint, who used
  almost the same language. &ldquo;I shall laugh my bitter laugh&rdquo; <a
  href="#linknote-3" name="linknoteref-3" id="linknoteref-3"><small>3</small></a>
  was the inscription placed on Gogol&rsquo;s grave.
</p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
                                                      JOHN COURNOS
</pre>
<p>
  Evenings on the Farm near the Dikanka, 1829-31; Mirgorod, 1831-33; Taras
  Bulba, 1834; Arabesques (includes tales, The Portrait and A Madman&rsquo;s
  Diary), 1831-35; The Cloak, 1835; The Revizor (The Inspector-General),
  1836; Dead Souls, 1842; Correspondence with Friends, 1847.
</p>
<p>
  ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS: Cossack Tales (The Night of Christmas Eve, Tarass
  Boolba), trans. by G. Tolstoy, 1860; St. John&rsquo;s Eve and Other Stories,
  trans. by Isabel F. Hapgood, New York, Crowell, 1886; Taras Bulba: Also
  St. John&rsquo;s Eve and Other Stories, London, Vizetelly, 1887; Taras Bulba,
  trans. by B. C. Baskerville, London, Scott, 1907; The Inspector: a Comedy,
  Calcutta, 1890; The Inspector-General, trans. by A. A. Sykes, London,
  Scott, 1892; Revizor, trans. for the Yale Dramatic Association by Max S.
  Mandell, New Haven, Conn., 1908; Home Life in Russia (adaptation of Dead
  Souls), London, Hurst, 1854; Tchitchikoff&rsquo;s Journey&rsquo;s; or Dead Souls,
  trans. by Isabel F. Hapgood, New York, Crowell, 1886; Dead Souls, London,
  Vizetelly, 1887; Dead Souls, London, Maxwell 1887; Meditations on the
  Divine Liturgy, trans. by L. Alexeieff, London, A. R. Mowbray and Co.,
  1913.
</p>
<p>
  LIVES, etc.: (Russian) Kotlyarevsky (N. A.), 1903; Shenrok (V. I.),
  Materials for a Biography, 1892; (French) Leger (L.), Nicholas Gogol,
  1914.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2H_4_0004" id="link2H_4_0004">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
