<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>
  CHAPTER VIII
</h2>
<p>
  It was not long before Chichikov&rsquo;s purchases had become the talk of the
  town; and various were the opinions expressed as to whether or not it was
  expedient to procure peasants for transferment. Indeed such was the
  interest taken by certain citizens in the matter that they advised the
  purchaser to provide himself and his convoy with an escort, in order to
  ensure their safe arrival at the appointed destination; but though
  Chichikov thanked the donors of this advice for the same, and declared
  that he should be very glad, in case of need, to avail himself of it, he
  declared also that there was no real need for an escort, seeing that the
  peasants whom he had purchased were exceptionally peace-loving folk, and
  that, being themselves consenting parties to the transferment, they would
  undoubtedly prove in every way tractable.
</p>
<p>
  One particularly good result of this advertisement of his scheme was that
  he came to rank as neither more nor less than a millionaire. Consequently,
  much as the inhabitants had liked our hero in the first instance (as seen
  in Chapter I.), they now liked him more than ever. As a matter of fact,
  they were citizens of an exceptionally quiet, good-natured, easy-going
  disposition; and some of them were even well-educated. For instance, the
  President of the Local Council could recite the whole of Zhukovski&rsquo;s
  LUDMILLA by heart, and give such an impressive rendering of the passage
  &ldquo;The pine forest was asleep and the valley at rest&rdquo; (as well as of the
  exclamation &ldquo;Phew!&rdquo;) that one felt, as he did so, that the pine forest and
  the valley really WERE as he described them. The effect was also further
  heightened by the manner in which, at such moments, he assumed the most
  portentous frown. For his part, the Postmaster went in more for
  philosophy, and diligently perused such works as Young&rsquo;s Night Thoughts,
  and Eckharthausen&rsquo;s A Key to the Mysteries of Nature; of which latter work
  he would make copious extracts, though no one had the slightest notion
  what they referred to. For the rest, he was a witty, florid little
  individual, and much addicted to a practice of what he called
  &ldquo;embellishing&rdquo; whatsoever he had to say&mdash;a feat which he performed
  with the aid of such by-the-way phrases as &ldquo;my dear sir,&rdquo; &ldquo;my good
  So-and-So,&rdquo; &ldquo;you know,&rdquo; &ldquo;you understand,&rdquo; &ldquo;you may imagine,&rdquo; &ldquo;relatively
  speaking,&rdquo; &ldquo;for instance,&rdquo; and &ldquo;et cetera&rdquo;; of which phrases he would add
  sackfuls to his speech. He could also &ldquo;embellish&rdquo; his words by the simple
  expedient of half-closing, half-winking one eye; which trick communicated
  to some of his satirical utterances quite a mordant effect. Nor were his
  colleagues a wit inferior to him in enlightenment. For instance, one of
  them made a regular practice of reading Karamzin, another of conning the
  Moscow Gazette, and a third of never looking at a book at all. Likewise,
  although they were the sort of men to whom, in their more intimate
  movements, their wives would very naturally address such nicknames as
  &ldquo;Toby Jug,&rdquo; &ldquo;Marmot,&rdquo; &ldquo;Fatty,&rdquo; &ldquo;Pot Belly,&rdquo; &ldquo;Smutty,&rdquo; &ldquo;Kiki,&rdquo; and
  &ldquo;Buzz-Buzz,&rdquo; they were men also of good heart, and very ready to extend
  their hospitality and their friendship when once a guest had eaten of
  their bread and salt, or spent an evening in their company. Particularly,
  therefore, did Chichikov earn these good folk&rsquo;s approval with his taking
  methods and qualities&mdash;so much so that the expression of that
  approval bid fair to make it difficult for him to quit the town, seeing
  that, wherever he went, the one phrase dinned into his ears was &ldquo;Stay
  another week with us, Paul Ivanovitch.&rdquo; In short, he ceased to be a free
  agent. But incomparably more striking was the impression (a matter for
  unbounded surprise!) which he produced upon the ladies. Properly to
  explain this phenomenon I should need to say a great deal about the ladies
  themselves, and to describe in the most vivid of colours their social
  intercourse and spiritual qualities. Yet this would be a difficult thing
  for me to do, since, on the one hand, I should be hampered by my boundless
  respect for the womenfolk of all Civil Service officials, and, on the
  other hand&mdash;well, simply by the innate arduousness of the task. The
  ladies of N. were&mdash;But no, I cannot do it; my heart has already
  failed me. Come, come! The ladies of N. were distinguished for&mdash;But
  it is of no use; somehow my pen seems to refuse to move over the paper&mdash;it
  seems to be weighted as with a plummet of lead. Very well. That being so,
  I will merely say a word or two concerning the most prominent tints on the
  feminine palette of N.&mdash;merely a word or two concerning the outward
  appearance of its ladies, and a word or two concerning their more
  superficial characteristics. The ladies of N. were pre-eminently what is
  known as &ldquo;presentable.&rdquo; Indeed, in that respect they might have served as
  a model to the ladies of many another town. That is to say, in whatever
  pertained to &ldquo;tone,&rdquo; etiquette, the intricacies of decorum, and strict
  observance of the prevailing mode, they surpassed even the ladies of
  Moscow and St. Petersburg, seeing that they dressed with taste, drove
  about in carriages in the latest fashions, and never went out without the
  escort of a footman in gold-laced livery. Again, they looked upon a
  visiting card&mdash;even upon a make-shift affair consisting of an ace of
  diamonds or a two of clubs&mdash;as a sacred thing; so sacred that on one
  occasion two closely related ladies who had also been closely attached
  friends were known to fall out with one another over the mere fact of an
  omission to return a social call! Yes, in spite of the best efforts of
  husbands and kinsfolk to reconcile the antagonists, it became clear that,
  though all else in the world might conceivably be possible, never could
  the hatchet be buried between ladies who had quarrelled over a neglected
  visit. Likewise strenuous scenes used to take place over questions of
  precedence&mdash;scenes of a kind which had the effect of inspiring
  husbands to great and knightly ideas on the subject of protecting the
  fair. True, never did a duel actually take place, since all the husbands
  were officials belonging to the Civil Service; but at least a given
  combatant would strive to heap contumely upon his rival, and, as we all
  know, that is a resource which may prove even more effectual than a duel.
  As regards morality, the ladies of N. were nothing if not censorious, and
  would at once be fired with virtuous indignation when they heard of a case
  of vice or seduction. Nay, even to mere frailty they would award the lash
  without mercy. On the other hand, should any instance of what they called
  &ldquo;third personism&rdquo; occur among THEIR OWN circle, it was always kept dark&mdash;not
  a hint of what was going on being allowed to transpire, and even the
  wronged husband holding himself ready, should he meet with, or hear of,
  the &ldquo;third person,&rdquo; to quote, in a mild and rational manner, the proverb,
  &ldquo;Whom concerns it that a friend should consort with friend?&rdquo; In addition,
  I may say that, like most of the female world of St. Petersburg, the
  ladies of N. were pre-eminently careful and refined in their choice of
  words and phrases. Never did a lady say, &ldquo;I blew my nose,&rdquo; or &ldquo;I
  perspired,&rdquo; or &ldquo;I spat.&rdquo; No, it had to be, &ldquo;I relieved my nose through the
  expedient of wiping it with my handkerchief,&rdquo; and so forth. Again, to say,
  &ldquo;This glass, or this plate, smells badly,&rdquo; was forbidden. No, not even a
  hint to such an effect was to be dropped. Rather, the proper phrase, in
  such a case, was &ldquo;This glass, or this plate, is not behaving very well,&rdquo;&mdash;or
  some such formula.
</p>
<p>
  In fact, to refine the Russian tongue the more thoroughly, something like
  half the words in it were cut out: which circumstance necessitated very
  frequent recourse to the tongue of France, since the same words, if spoken
  in French, were another matter altogether, and one could use even blunter
  ones than the ones originally objected to.
</p>
<p>
  So much for the ladies of N., provided that one confines one&rsquo;s
  observations to the surface; yet hardly need it be said that, should one
  penetrate deeper than that, a great deal more would come to light. At the
  same time, it is never a very safe proceeding to peer deeply into the
  hearts of ladies; wherefore, restricting ourselves to the foregoing
  superficialities, let us proceed further on our way.
</p>
<p>
  Hitherto the ladies had paid Chichikov no particular attention, though
  giving him full credit for his gentlemanly and urbane demeanour; but from
  the moment that there arose rumours of his being a millionaire other
  qualities of his began to be canvassed. Nevertheless, not ALL the ladies
  were governed by interested motives, since it is due to the term
  &ldquo;millionaire&rdquo; rather than to the character of the person who bears it,
  that the mere sound of the word exercises upon rascals, upon decent folk,
  and upon folk who are neither the one nor the other, an undeniable
  influence. A millionaire suffers from the disadvantage of everywhere
  having to behold meanness, including the sort of meanness which, though
  not actually based upon calculations of self-interest, yet runs after the
  wealthy man with smiles, and doffs his hat, and begs for invitations to
  houses where the millionaire is known to be going to dine. That a similar
  inclination to meanness seized upon the ladies of N. goes without saying;
  with the result that many a drawing-room heard it whispered that, if
  Chichikov was not exactly a beauty, at least he was sufficiently
  good-looking to serve for a husband, though he could have borne to have
  been a little more rotund and stout. To that there would be added scornful
  references to lean husbands, and hints that they resembled tooth-brushes
  rather than men&mdash;with many other feminine additions. Also, such
  crowds of feminine shoppers began to repair to the Bazaar as almost to
  constitute a crush, and something like a procession of carriages ensued,
  so long grew the rank of vehicles. For their part, the tradesmen had the
  joy of seeing highly priced dress materials which they had bought at
  fairs, and then been unable to dispose of, now suddenly become tradeable,
  and go off with a rush. For instance, on one occasion a lady appeared at
  Mass in a bustle which filled the church to an extent which led the verger
  on duty to bid the commoner folk withdraw to the porch, lest the lady&rsquo;s
  toilet should be soiled in the crush. Even Chichikov could not help
  privately remarking the attention which he aroused. On one occasion, when
  he returned to the inn, he found on his table a note addressed to himself.
  Whence it had come, and who had delivered it, he failed to discover, for
  the waiter declared that the person who had brought it had omitted to
  leave the name of the writer. Beginning abruptly with the words &ldquo;I MUST
  write to you,&rdquo; the letter went on to say that between a certain pair of
  souls there existed a bond of sympathy; and this verity the epistle
  further confirmed with rows of full stops to the extent of nearly half a
  page. Next there followed a few reflections of a correctitude so
  remarkable that I have no choice but to quote them. &ldquo;What, I would ask, is
  this life of ours?&rdquo; inquired the writer. &ldquo;&lsquo;Tis nought but a vale of woe.
  And what, I would ask, is the world? &lsquo;Tis nought but a mob of unthinking
  humanity.&rdquo; Thereafter, incidentally remarking that she had just dropped a
  tear to the memory of her dear mother, who had departed this life
  twenty-five years ago, the (presumably) lady writer invited Chichikov to
  come forth into the wilds, and to leave for ever the city where, penned in
  noisome haunts, folk could not even draw their breath. In conclusion, the
  writer gave way to unconcealed despair, and wound up with the following
  verses:
</p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
&ldquo;Two turtle doves to thee, one day,
My dust will show, congealed in death;
And, cooing wearily, they&rsquo;ll say:
&lsquo;In grief and loneliness she drew her closing breath.&rsquo;&rdquo;
</pre>
<p>
  True, the last line did not scan, but that was a trifle, since the
  quatrain at least conformed to the mode then prevalent. Neither signature
  nor date were appended to the document, but only a postscript expressing a
  conjecture that Chichikov&rsquo;s own heart would tell him who the writer was,
  and stating, in addition, that the said writer would be present at the
  Governor&rsquo;s ball on the following night.
</p>
<p>
  This greatly interested Chichikov. Indeed, there was so much that was
  alluring and provocative of curiosity in the anonymous missive that he
  read it through a second time, and then a third, and finally said to
  himself: &ldquo;I SHOULD like to know who sent it!&rdquo; In short, he took the thing
  seriously, and spent over an hour in considering the same. At length,
  muttering a comment upon the epistle&rsquo;s efflorescent style, he refolded the
  document, and committed it to his dispatch-box in company with a play-bill
  and an invitation to a wedding&mdash;the latter of which had for the last
  seven years reposed in the self-same receptacle and in the self-same
  position. Shortly afterwards there arrived a card of invitation to the
  Governor&rsquo;s ball already referred to. In passing, it may be said that such
  festivities are not infrequent phenomena in county towns, for the reason
  that where Governors exist there must take place balls if from the local
  gentry there is to be evoked that respectful affection which is every
  Governor&rsquo;s due.
</p>
<p>
  Thenceforth all extraneous thoughts and considerations were laid aside in
  favour of preparing for the coming function. Indeed, this conjunction of
  exciting and provocative motives led to Chichikov devoting to his toilet
  an amount of time never witnessed since the creation of the world. Merely
  in the contemplation of his features in the mirror, as he tried to
  communicate to them a succession of varying expressions, was an hour
  spent. First of all he strove to make his features assume an air of
  dignity and importance, and then an air of humble, but faintly satirical,
  respect, and then an air of respect guiltless of any alloy whatsoever.
  Next, he practised performing a series of bows to his reflection,
  accompanied with certain murmurs intended to bear a resemblance to a
  French phrase (though Chichikov knew not a single word of the Gallic
  tongue). Lastly came the performing of a series of what I might call
  &ldquo;agreeable surprises,&rdquo; in the shape of twitchings of the brow and lips and
  certain motions of the tongue. In short, he did all that a man is apt to
  do when he is not only alone, but also certain that he is handsome and
  that no one is regarding him through a chink. Finally he tapped himself
  lightly on the chin, and said, &ldquo;Ah, good old face!&rdquo; In the same way, when
  he started to dress himself for the ceremony, the level of his high
  spirits remained unimpaired throughout the process. That is to say, while
  adjusting his braces and tying his tie, he shuffled his feet in what was
  not exactly a dance, but might be called the entr&rsquo;acte of a dance: which
  performance had the not very serious result of setting a wardrobe
  a-rattle, and causing a brush to slide from the table to the floor.
</p>
<p>
  Later, his entry into the ballroom produced an extraordinary effect. Every
  one present came forward to meet him, some with cards in their hands, and
  one man even breaking off a conversation at the most interesting point&mdash;namely,
  the point that &ldquo;the Inferior Land Court must be made responsible for
  everything.&rdquo; Yes, in spite of the responsibility of the Inferior Land
  Court, the speaker cast all thoughts of it to the winds as he hurried to
  greet our hero. From every side resounded acclamations of welcome, and
  Chichikov felt himself engulfed in a sea of embraces. Thus, scarcely had
  he extricated himself from the arms of the President of the Local Council
  when he found himself just as firmly clasped in the arms of the Chief of
  Police, who, in turn, surrendered him to the Inspector of the Medical
  Department, who, in turn, handed him over to the Commissioner of Taxes,
  who, again, committed him to the charge of the Town Architect. Even the
  Governor, who hitherto had been standing among his womenfolk with a box of
  sweets in one hand and a lap-dog in the other, now threw down both sweets
  and lap-dog (the lap-dog giving vent to a yelp as he did so) and added his
  greeting to those of the rest of the company. Indeed, not a face was there
  to be seen on which ecstatic delight&mdash;or, at all events, the
  reflection of other people&rsquo;s ecstatic delight&mdash;was not painted. The
  same expression may be discerned on the faces of subordinate officials
  when, the newly arrived Director having made his inspection, the said
  officials are beginning to get over their first sense of awe on perceiving
  that he has found much to commend, and that he can even go so far as to
  jest and utter a few words of smiling approval. Thereupon every tchinovnik
  responds with a smile of double strength, and those who (it may be) have
  not heard a single word of the Director&rsquo;s speech smile out of sympathy
  with the rest, and even the gendarme who is posted at the distant door&mdash;a
  man, perhaps, who has never before compassed a smile, but is more
  accustomed to dealing out blows to the populace&mdash;summons up a kind of
  grin, even though the grin resembles the grimace of a man who is about to
  sneeze after inadvertently taking an over-large pinch of snuff. To all and
  sundry Chichikov responded with a bow, and felt extraordinarily at his
  ease as he did so. To right and left did he incline his head in the
  sidelong, yet unconstrained, manner that was his wont and never failed to
  charm the beholder. As for the ladies, they clustered around him in a
  shining bevy that was redolent of every species of perfume&mdash;of roses,
  of spring violets, and of mignonette; so much so that instinctively
  Chichikov raised his nose to snuff the air. Likewise the ladies&rsquo; dresses
  displayed an endless profusion of taste and variety; and though the
  majority of their wearers evinced a tendency to embonpoint, those wearers
  knew how to call upon art for the concealment of the fact. Confronting
  them, Chichikov thought to himself: &ldquo;Which of these beauties is the writer
  of the letter?&rdquo; Then again he snuffed the air. When the ladies had, to a
  certain extent, returned to their seats, he resumed his attempts to
  discern (from glances and expressions) which of them could possibly be the
  unknown authoress. Yet, though those glances and expressions were too
  subtle, too insufficiently open, the difficulty in no way diminished his
  high spirits. Easily and gracefully did he exchange agreeable bandinage
  with one lady, and then approach another one with the short, mincing steps
  usually affected by young-old dandies who are fluttering around the fair.
  As he turned, not without dexterity, to right and left, he kept one leg
  slightly dragging behind the other, like a short tail or comma. This trick
  the ladies particularly admired. In short, they not only discovered in him
  a host of recommendations and attractions, but also began to see in his
  face a sort of grand, Mars-like, military expression&mdash;a thing which,
  as we know, never fails to please the feminine eye. Certain of the ladies
  even took to bickering over him, and, on perceiving that he spent most of
  his time standing near the door, some of their number hastened to occupy
  chairs nearer to his post of vantage. In fact, when a certain dame chanced
  to have the good fortune to anticipate a hated rival in the race there
  very nearly ensued a most lamentable scene&mdash;which, to many of those
  who had been desirous of doing exactly the same thing, seemed a peculiarly
  horrible instance of brazen-faced audacity.
</p>
<p>
  So deeply did Chichikov become plunged in conversation with his fair
  pursuers&mdash;or rather, so deeply did those fair pursuers enmesh him in
  the toils of small talk (which they accomplished through the expedient of
  asking him endless subtle riddles which brought the sweat to his brow in
  his attempts to guess them)&mdash;that he forgot the claims of courtesy
  which required him first of all to greet his hostess. In fact, he
  remembered those claims only on hearing the Governor&rsquo;s wife herself
  addressing him. She had been standing before him for several minutes, and
  now greeted him with suave expressement and the words, &ldquo;So HERE you are,
  Paul Ivanovitch!&rdquo; But what she said next I am not in a position to report,
  for she spoke in the ultra-refined tone and vein wherein ladies and
  gentlemen customarily express themselves in high-class novels which have
  been written by experts more qualified than I am to describe salons, and
  able to boast of some acquaintance with good society. In effect, what the
  Governor&rsquo;s wife said was that she hoped&mdash;she greatly hoped&mdash;that
  Monsieur Chichikov&rsquo;s heart still contained a corner&mdash;even the
  smallest possible corner&mdash;for those whom he had so cruelly forgotten.
  Upon that Chichikov turned to her, and was on the point of returning a
  reply at least no worse than that which would have been returned, under
  similar circumstances, by the hero of a fashionable novelette, when he
  stopped short, as though thunderstruck.
</p>
<p>
  Before him there was standing not only Madame, but also a young girl whom
  she was holding by the hand. The golden hair, the fine-drawn, delicate
  contours, the face with its bewitching oval&mdash;a face which might have
  served as a model for the countenance of the Madonna, since it was of a
  type rarely to be met with in Russia, where nearly everything, from plains
  to human feet, is, rather, on the gigantic scale; these features, I say,
  were those of the identical maiden whom Chichikov had encountered on the
  road when he had been fleeing from Nozdrev&rsquo;s. His emotion was such that he
  could not formulate a single intelligible syllable; he could merely murmur
  the devil only knows what, though certainly nothing of the kind which
  would have risen to the lips of the hero of a fashionable novel.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I think that you have not met my daughter before?&rdquo; said Madame. &ldquo;She is
  just fresh from school.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He replied that he HAD had the happiness of meeting Mademoiselle before,
  and under rather unexpected circumstances; but on his trying to say
  something further his tongue completely failed him. The Governor&rsquo;s wife
  added a word or two, and then carried off her daughter to speak to some of
  the other guests.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov stood rooted to the spot, like a man who, after issuing into the
  street for a pleasant walk, has suddenly come to a halt on remembering
  that something has been left behind him. In a moment, as he struggles to
  recall what that something is, the mien of careless expectancy disappears
  from his face, and he no longer sees a single person or a single object in
  his vicinity. In the same way did Chichikov suddenly become oblivious to
  the scene around him. Yet all the while the melodious tongues of ladies
  were plying him with multitudinous hints and questions&mdash;hints and
  questions inspired with a desire to captivate. &ldquo;Might we poor cumberers of
  the ground make so bold as to ask you what you are thinking of?&rdquo; &ldquo;Pray
  tell us where lie the happy regions in which your thoughts are wandering?&rdquo;
   &ldquo;Might we be informed of the name of her who has plunged you into this
  sweet abandonment of meditation?&rdquo;&mdash;such were the phrases thrown at
  him. But to everything he turned a dead ear, and the phrases in question
  might as well have been stones dropped into a pool. Indeed, his rudeness
  soon reached the pitch of his walking away altogether, in order that he
  might go and reconnoitre wither the Governor&rsquo;s wife and daughter had
  retreated. But the ladies were not going to let him off so easily. Every
  one of them had made up her mind to use upon him her every weapon, and to
  exhibit whatsoever might chance to constitute her best point. Yet the
  ladies&rsquo; wiles proved useless, for Chichikov paid not the smallest
  attention to them, even when the dancing had begun, but kept raising
  himself on tiptoe to peer over people&rsquo;s heads and ascertain in which
  direction the bewitching maiden with the golden hair had gone. Also, when
  seated, he continued to peep between his neighbours&rsquo; backs and shoulders,
  until at last he discovered her sitting beside her mother, who was wearing
  a sort of Oriental turban and feather. Upon that one would have thought
  that his purpose was to carry the position by storm; for, whether moved by
  the influence of spring, or whether moved by a push from behind, he
  pressed forward with such desperate resolution that his elbow caused the
  Commissioner of Taxes to stagger on his feet, and would have caused him to
  lose his balance altogether but for the supporting row of guests in the
  rear. Likewise the Postmaster was made to give ground; whereupon he turned
  and eyed Chichikov with mingled astonishment and subtle irony. But
  Chichikov never even noticed him; he saw in the distance only the
  golden-haired beauty. At that moment she was drawing on a long glove and,
  doubtless, pining to be flying over the dancing-floor, where, with
  clicking heels, four couples had now begun to thread the mazes of the
  mazurka. In particular was a military staff-captain working body and soul
  and arms and legs to compass such a series of steps as were never before
  performed, even in a dream. However, Chichikov slipped past the mazurka
  dancers, and, almost treading on their heels, made his way towards the
  spot where Madame and her daughter were seated. Yet he approached them
  with great diffidence and none of his late mincing and prancing. Nay, he
  even faltered as he walked; his every movement had about it an air of
  awkwardness.
</p>
<p>
  It is difficult to say whether or not the feeling which had awakened in
  our hero&rsquo;s breast was the feeling of love; for it is problematical whether
  or not men who are neither stout nor thin are capable of any such
  sentiment. Nevertheless, something strange, something which he could not
  altogether explain, had come upon him. It seemed as though the ball, with
  its talk and its clatter, had suddenly become a thing remote&mdash;that
  the orchestra had withdrawn behind a hill, and the scene grown misty, like
  the carelessly painted-in background of a picture. And from that misty
  void there could be seen glimmering only the delicate outlines of the
  bewitching maiden. Somehow her exquisite shape reminded him of an ivory
  toy, in such fair, white, transparent relief did it stand out against the
  dull blur of the surrounding throng.
</p>
<p>
  Herein we see a phenomenon not infrequently observed&mdash;the phenomenon
  of the Chichikovs of this world becoming temporarily poets. At all events,
  for a moment or two our Chichikov felt that he was a young man again, if
  not exactly a military officer. On perceiving an empty chair beside the
  mother and daughter, he hastened to occupy it, and though conversation at
  first hung fire, things gradually improved, and he acquired more
  confidence.
</p>
<p>
  At this point I must reluctantly deviate to say that men of weight and
  high office are always a trifle ponderous when conversing with ladies.
  Young lieutenants&mdash;or, at all events, officers not above the rank of
  captain&mdash;are far more successful at the game. How they contrive to be
  so God only knows. Let them but make the most inane of remarks, and at
  once the maiden by their side will be rocking with laughter; whereas,
  should a State Councillor enter into conversation with a damsel, and
  remark that the Russian Empire is one of vast extent, or utter a
  compliment which he has elaborated not without a certain measure of
  intelligence (however strongly the said compliment may smack of a book),
  of a surety the thing will fall flat. Even a witticism from him will be
  laughed at far more by him himself than it will by the lady who may happen
  to be listening to his remarks.
</p>
<p>
  These comments I have interposed for the purpose of explaining to the
  reader why, as our hero conversed, the maiden began to yawn. Blind to
  this, however, he continued to relate to her sundry adventures which had
  befallen him in different parts of the world. Meanwhile (as need hardly be
  said) the rest of the ladies had taken umbrage at his behaviour. One of
  them purposely stalked past him to intimate to him the fact, as well as to
  jostle the Governor&rsquo;s daughter, and let the flying end of a scarf flick
  her face; while from a lady seated behind the pair came both a whiff of
  violets and a very venomous and sarcastic remark. Nevertheless, either he
  did not hear the remark or he PRETENDED not to hear it. This was unwise of
  him, since it never does to disregard ladies&rsquo; opinions. Later&mdash;but too late&mdash;he
  was destined to learn this to his cost.
</p>
<p>
  In short, dissatisfaction began to display itself on every feminine face.
  No matter how high Chichikov might stand in society, and no matter how
  much he might be a millionaire and include in his expression of
  countenance an indefinable element of grandness and martial ardour, there
  are certain things which no lady will pardon, whosoever be the person
  concerned. We know that at Governor&rsquo;s balls it is customary for the
  onlookers to compose verses at the expense of the dancers; and in this
  case the verses were directed to Chichikov&rsquo;s address. Briefly, the
  prevailing dissatisfaction grew until a tacit edict of proscription had
  been issued against both him and the poor young maiden.
</p>
<p>
  But an even more unpleasant surprise was in store for our hero; for whilst
  the young lady was still yawning as Chichikov recounted to her certain of
  his past adventures and also touched lightly upon the subject of Greek
  philosophy, there appeared from an adjoining room the figure of Nozdrev.
  Whether he had come from the buffet, or whether he had issued from a
  little green retreat where a game more strenuous than whist had been in
  progress, or whether he had left the latter resort unaided, or whether he
  had been expelled therefrom, is unknown; but at all events when he entered
  the ballroom, he was in an elevated condition, and leading by the arm the
  Public Prosecutor, whom he seemed to have been dragging about for a long
  while past, seeing that the poor man was glancing from side to side as
  though seeking a means of putting an end to this personally conducted
  tour. Certainly he must have found the situation almost unbearable, in
  view of the fact that, after deriving inspiration from two glasses of tea
  not wholly undiluted with rum, Nozdrev was engaged in lying unmercifully.
  On sighting him in the distance, Chichikov at once decided to sacrifice
  himself. That is to say, he decided to vacate his present enviable
  position and make off with all possible speed, since he could see that an
  encounter with the newcomer would do him no good. Unfortunately at that
  moment the Governor buttonholed him with a request that he would come and
  act as arbiter between him (the Governor) and two ladies&mdash;the subject
  of dispute being the question as to whether or not woman&rsquo;s love is
  lasting. Simultaneously Nozdrev descried our hero and bore down upon him.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, my fine landowner of Kherson!&rdquo; he cried with a smile which set his
  fresh, spring-rose-pink cheeks a-quiver. &ldquo;Have you been doing much trade
  in departed souls lately?&rdquo; With that he turned to the Governor. &ldquo;I suppose
  your Excellency knows that this man traffics in dead peasants?&rdquo; he bawled.
  &ldquo;Look here, Chichikov. I tell you in the most friendly way possible that
  every one here likes you&mdash;yes, including even the Governor.
  Nevertheless, had I my way, I would hang you! Yes, by God I would!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov&rsquo;s discomfiture was complete.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And, would you believe it, your Excellency,&rdquo; went on Nozdrev, &ldquo;but this
  fellow actually said to me, &lsquo;Sell me your dead souls!&rsquo; Why, I laughed till
  I nearly became as dead as the souls. And, behold, no sooner do I arrive
  here than I am told that he has bought three million roubles&rsquo; worth of
  peasants for transferment! For transferment, indeed! And he wanted to
  bargain with me for my DEAD ones! Look here, Chichikov. You are a swine!
  Yes, by God, you are an utter swine! Is not that so, your Excellency? Is
  not that so, friend Prokurator <a href="#linknote-34" name="linknoteref-34"
   id="linknoteref-34"><small>34</small></a>?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  But both his Excellency, the Public Prosecutor, and Chichikov were too
  taken aback to reply. The half-tipsy Nozdrev, without noticing them,
  continued his harangue as before.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, my fine sir!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;THIS time I don&rsquo;t mean to let you go. No,
  not until I have learnt what all this purchasing of dead peasants means.
  Look here. You ought to be ashamed of yourself. Yes, <i>I</i> say that&mdash;<i>I</i>
  who am one of your best friends.&rdquo; Here he turned to the Governor again.
  &ldquo;Your Excellency,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;you would never believe what
  inseperables this man and I have been. Indeed, if you had stood there and
  said to me, &lsquo;Nozdrev, tell me on your honour which of the two you love
  best&mdash;your father or Chichikov?&rsquo; I should have replied, &lsquo;Chichikov,
  by God!&rsquo;&rdquo; With that he tackled our hero again, &ldquo;Come, come, my friend!&rdquo; he
  urged. &ldquo;Let me imprint upon your cheeks a baiser or two. You will excuse
  me if I kiss him, will you not, your Excellency? No, do not resist me,
  Chichikov, but allow me to imprint at least one baiser upon your
  lily-white cheek.&rdquo; And in his efforts to force upon Chichikov what he
  termed his &ldquo;baisers&rdquo; he came near to measuring his length upon the floor.
</p>
<p>
  Every one now edged away, and turned a deaf ear to his further babblings;
  but his words on the subject of the purchase of dead souls had none the
  less been uttered at the top of his voice, and been accompanied with such
  uproarious laughter that the curiosity even of those who had happened to
  be sitting or standing in the remoter corners of the room had been
  aroused. So strange and novel seemed the idea that the company stood with
  faces expressive of nothing but a dumb, dull wonder. Only some of the
  ladies (as Chichikov did not fail to remark) exchanged meaning,
  ill-natured winks and a series of sarcastic smiles: which circumstance
  still further increased his confusion. That Nozdrev was a notorious liar
  every one, of course, knew, and that he should have given vent to an
  idiotic outburst of this sort had surprised no one; but a dead soul&mdash;well,
  what was one to make of Nozdrev&rsquo;s reference to such a commodity?
</p>
<p>
  Naturally this unseemly contretemps had greatly upset our hero; for,
  however foolish be a madman&rsquo;s words, they may yet prove sufficient to sow
  doubt in the minds of saner individuals. He felt much as does a man who,
  shod with well-polished boots, has just stepped into a dirty, stinking
  puddle. He tried to put away from him the occurrence, and to expand, and
  to enjoy himself once more. Nay, he even took a hand at whist. But all was
  of no avail&mdash;matters kept going as awry as a badly-bent hoop. Twice
  he blundered in his play, and the President of the Council was at a loss
  to understand how his friend, Paul Ivanovitch, lately so good and so
  circumspect a player, could perpetrate such a mauvais pas as to throw away
  a particular king of spades which the President has been &ldquo;trusting&rdquo; as (to
  quote his own expression) &ldquo;he would have trusted God.&rdquo; At supper, too,
  matters felt uncomfortable, even though the society at Chichikov&rsquo;s table
  was exceedingly agreeable and Nozdrev had been removed, owing to the fact
  that the ladies had found his conduct too scandalous to be borne, now that
  the delinquent had taken to seating himself on the floor and plucking at
  the skirts of passing lady dancers. As I say, therefore, Chichikov found
  the situation not a little awkward, and eventually put an end to it by
  leaving the supper room before the meal was over, and long before the hour
  when usually he returned to the inn.
</p>
<p>
  In his little room, with its door of communication blocked with a
  wardrobe, his frame of mind remained as uncomfortable as the chair in
  which he was seated. His heart ached with a dull, unpleasant sensation,
  with a sort of oppressive emptiness.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The devil take those who first invented balls!&rdquo; was his reflection. &ldquo;Who
  derives any real pleasure from them? In this province there exist want and
  scarcity everywhere: yet folk go in for balls! How absurd, too, were those
  overdressed women! One of them must have had a thousand roubles on her
  back, and all acquired at the expense of the overtaxed peasant, or, worse
  still, at that of the conscience of her neighbour. Yes, we all know why
  bribes are accepted, and why men become crooked in soul. It is all done to
  provide wives&mdash;yes, may the pit swallow them up!&mdash;with fal-lals.
  And for what purpose? That some woman may not have to reproach her husband
  with the fact that, say, the Postmaster&rsquo;s wife is wearing a better dress
  than she is&mdash;a dress which has cost a thousand roubles! &lsquo;Balls and
  gaiety, balls and gaiety&rsquo; is the constant cry. Yet what folly balls are!
  They do not consort with the Russian spirit and genius, and the devil only
  knows why we have them. A grown, middle-aged man&mdash;a man dressed in
  black, and looking as stiff as a poker&mdash;suddenly takes the floor and
  begins shuffling his feet about, while another man, even though conversing
  with a companion on important business, will, the while, keep capering to
  right and left like a billy-goat! Mimicry, sheer mimicry! The fact that
  the Frenchman is at forty precisely what he was at fifteen leads us to
  imagine that we too, forsooth, ought to be the same. No; a ball leaves one
  feeling that one has done a wrong thing&mdash;so much so that one does not
  care even to think of it. It also leaves one&rsquo;s head perfectly empty, even
  as does the exertion of talking to a man of the world. A man of that kind
  chatters away, and touches lightly upon every conceivable subject, and
  talks in smooth, fluent phrases which he has culled from books without
  grazing their substance; whereas go and have a chat with a tradesman who
  knows at least ONE thing thoroughly, and through the medium of experience,
  and see whether his conversation will not be worth more than the prattle
  of a thousand chatterboxes. For what good does one get out of balls?
  Suppose that a competent writer were to describe such a scene exactly as
  it stands? Why, even in a book it would seem senseless, even as it
  certainly is in life. Are, therefore, such functions right or wrong? One
  would answer that the devil alone knows, and then spit and close the
  book.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Such were the unfavourable comments which Chichikov passed upon balls in
  general. With it all, however, there went a second source of
  dissatisfaction. That is to say, his principal grudge was not so much
  against balls as against the fact that at this particular one he had been
  exposed, he had been made to disclose the circumstance that he had been
  playing a strange, an ambiguous part. Of course, when he reviewed the
  contretemps in the light of pure reason, he could not but see that it
  mattered nothing, and that a few rude words were of no account now that
  the chief point had been attained; yet man is an odd creature, and
  Chichikov actually felt pained by the cold-shouldering administered to
  him by persons for whom he had not an atom of respect, and whose vanity
  and love of display he had only that moment been censuring. Still more, on
  viewing the matter clearly, he felt vexed to think that he himself had
  been so largely the cause of the catastrophe.
</p>
<p>
  Yet he was not angry with HIMSELF&mdash;of that you may be sure, seeing
  that all of us have a slight weakness for sparing our own faults, and
  always do our best to find some fellow-creature upon whom to vent our
  displeasure&mdash;whether that fellow-creature be a servant, a subordinate
  official, or a wife. In the same way Chichikov sought a scapegoat upon
  whose shoulders he could lay the blame for all that had annoyed him. He
  found one in Nozdrev, and you may be sure that the scapegoat in question
  received a good drubbing from every side, even as an experienced captain
  or chief of police will give a knavish starosta or postboy a rating not
  only in the terms become classical, but also in such terms as the said
  captain or chief of police may invent for himself. In short, Nozdrev&rsquo;s
  whole lineage was passed in review; and many of its members in the
  ascending line fared badly in the process.
</p>
<p>
  Meanwhile, at the other end of the town there was in progress an event
  which was destined to augment still further the unpleasantness of our
  hero&rsquo;s position. That is to say, through the outlying streets and alleys
  of the town there was clattering a vehicle to which it would be difficult
  precisely to assign a name, seeing that, though it was of a species
  peculiar to itself, it most nearly resembled a large, rickety water melon
  on wheels. Eventually this monstrosity drew up at the gates of a house
  where the archpriest of one of the churches resided, and from its doors
  there leapt a damsel clad in a jerkin and wearing a scarf over her head.
  For a while she thumped the gates so vigorously as to set all the dogs
  barking; then the gates stiffly opened, and admitted this unwieldy
  phenomenon of the road. Lastly, the barinia herself alighted, and stood
  revealed as Madame Korobotchka, widow of a Collegiate Secretary! The
  reason of her sudden arrival was that she had felt so uneasy about the
  possible outcome of Chichikov&rsquo;s whim, that during the three nights
  following his departure she had been unable to sleep a wink; whereafter,
  in spite of the fact that her horses were not shod, she had set off for
  the town, in order to learn at first hand how the dead souls were faring,
  and whether (which might God forfend!) she had not sold them at something
  like a third of their true value. The consequences of her venture the
  reader will learn from a conversation between two ladies. We will reserve
  it for the ensuing chapter.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0009" id="link2HCH0009">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
