<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>
  CHAPTER III
</h2>
<p>
  Meanwhile, Chichikov, seated in his britchka and bowling along the
  turnpike, was feeling greatly pleased with himself. From the preceding
  chapter the reader will have gathered the principal subject of his bent
  and inclinations: wherefore it is no matter for wonder that his body and
  his soul had ended by becoming wholly immersed therein. To all appearances
  the thoughts, the calculations, and the projects which were now reflected
  in his face partook of a pleasant nature, since momentarily they kept
  leaving behind them a satisfied smile. Indeed, so engrossed was he that he
  never noticed that his coachman, elated with the hospitality of Manilov&rsquo;s
  domestics, was making remarks of a didactic nature to the off horse of the
  troika <a href="#linknote-11" name="linknoteref-11" id="linknoteref-11"><small>11</small></a>,
  a skewbald. This skewbald was a knowing animal, and made only a show of
  pulling; whereas its comrades, the middle horse (a bay, and known as the
  Assessor, owing to his having been acquired from a gentleman of that rank)
  and the near horse (a roan), would do their work gallantly, and even
  evince in their eyes the pleasure which they derived from their exertions.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, you rascal, you rascal! I&rsquo;ll get the better of you!&rdquo; ejaculated
  Selifan as he sat up and gave the lazy one a cut with his whip. &ldquo;YOU know
  your business all right, you German pantaloon! The bay is a good fellow,
  and does his duty, and I will give him a bit over his feed, for he is a
  horse to be respected; and the Assessor too is a good horse. But what are
  YOU shaking your ears for? You are a fool, so just mind when you&rsquo;re spoken
  to. &lsquo;Tis good advice I&rsquo;m giving you, you blockhead. Ah! You CAN travel
  when you like.&rdquo; And he gave the animal another cut, and then shouted to
  the trio, &ldquo;Gee up, my beauties!&rdquo; and drew his whip gently across the backs
  of the skewbald&rsquo;s comrades&mdash;not as a punishment, but as a sign of his
  approval. That done, he addressed himself to the skewbald again.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do you think,&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;that I don&rsquo;t see what you are doing? You can
  behave quite decently when you like, and make a man respect you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  With that he fell to recalling certain reminiscences.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;They were NICE folk, those folk at the gentleman&rsquo;s yonder,&rdquo; he mused. &ldquo;I
  DO love a chat with a man when he is a good sort. With a man of that kind
  I am always hail-fellow-well-met, and glad to drink a glass of tea with
  him, or to eat a biscuit. One CAN&rsquo;T help respecting a decent fellow. For
  instance, this gentleman of mine&mdash;why, every one looks up to him, for
  he has been in the Government&rsquo;s service, and is a Collegiate Councillor.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Thus soliloquising, he passed to more remote abstractions; until, had
  Chichikov been listening, he would have learnt a number of interesting
  details concerning himself. However, his thoughts were wholly occupied
  with his own subject, so much so that not until a loud clap of thunder
  awoke him from his reverie did he glance around him. The sky was
  completely covered with clouds, and the dusty turnpike beginning to be
  sprinkled with drops of rain. At length a second and a nearer and a louder
  peal resounded, and the rain descended as from a bucket. Falling
  slantwise, it beat upon one side of the basketwork of the tilt until the
  splashings began to spurt into his face, and he found himself forced to
  draw the curtains (fitted with circular openings through which to obtain a
  glimpse of the wayside view), and to shout to Selifan to quicken his pace.
  Upon that the coachman, interrupted in the middle of his harangue,
  bethought him that no time was to be lost; wherefore, extracting from
  under the box-seat a piece of old blanket, he covered over his sleeves,
  resumed the reins, and cheered on his threefold team (which, it may be
  said, had so completely succumbed to the influence of the pleasant
  lassitude induced by Selifan&rsquo;s discourse that it had taken to scarcely
  placing one leg before the other). Unfortunately, Selifan could not
  clearly remember whether two turnings had been passed or three. Indeed, on
  collecting his faculties, and dimly recalling the lie of the road, he
  became filled with a shrewd suspicion that A VERY LARGE NUMBER of turnings
  had been passed. But since, at moments which call for a hasty decision, a
  Russian is quick to discover what may conceivably be the best course to
  take, our coachman put away from him all ulterior reasoning, and, turning
  to the right at the next cross-road, shouted, &ldquo;Hi, my beauties!&rdquo; and set
  off at a gallop. Never for a moment did he stop to think whither the road
  might lead him!
</p>
<p>
  It was long before the clouds had discharged their burden, and, meanwhile,
  the dust on the road became kneaded into mire, and the horses&rsquo; task of
  pulling the britchka heavier and heavier. Also, Chichikov had taken alarm
  at his continued failure to catch sight of Sobakevitch&rsquo;s country house.
  According to his calculations, it ought to have been reached long ago. He
  gazed about him on every side, but the darkness was too dense for the eye
  to pierce.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Selifan!&rdquo; he exclaimed, leaning forward in the britchka.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What is it, barin?&rdquo; replied the coachman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Can you see the country house anywhere?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, barin.&rdquo; After which, with a flourish of the whip, the man broke into
  a sort of endless, drawling song. In that song everything had a place. By
  &ldquo;everything&rdquo; I mean both the various encouraging and stimulating cries
  with which Russian folk urge on their horses, and a random, unpremeditated
  selection of adjectives.
</p>
<p>
  Meanwhile Chichikov began to notice that the britchka was swaying
  violently, and dealing him occasional bumps. Consequently he suspected
  that it had left the road and was being dragged over a ploughed field.
  Upon Selifan&rsquo;s mind there appeared to have dawned a similar inkling, for
  he had ceased to hold forth.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You rascal, what road are you following?&rdquo; inquired Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know,&rdquo; retorted the coachman. &ldquo;What can a man do at a time of
  night when the darkness won&rsquo;t let him even see his whip?&rdquo; And as Selifan
  spoke the vehicle tilted to an angle which left Chichikov no choice but to
  hang on with hands and teeth. At length he realised the fact that Selifan
  was drunk.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Stop, stop, or you will upset us!&rdquo; he shouted to the fellow.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, barin,&rdquo; replied Selifan. &ldquo;HOW could I upset you? To upset people
  is wrong. I know that very well, and should never dream of such conduct.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Here he started to turn the vehicle round a little&mdash;and kept on doing
  so until the britchka capsized on to its side, and Chichikov landed in the
  mud on his hands and knees. Fortunately Selifan succeeded in stopping the
  horses, although they would have stopped of themselves, seeing that they
  were utterly worn out. This unforeseen catastrophe evidently astonished
  their driver. Slipping from the box, he stood resting his hands against
  the side of the britchka, while Chichikov tumbled and floundered about in
  the mud, in a vain endeavour to wriggle clear of the stuff.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, you!&rdquo; said Selifan meditatively to the britchka. &ldquo;To think of
  upsetting us like this!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are as drunk as a lord!&rdquo; exclaimed Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, barin. Drunk, indeed? Why, I know my manners too well. A word or
  two with a friend&mdash;that is all that I have taken. Any one may talk
  with a decent man when he meets him. There is nothing wrong in that. Also,
  we had a snack together. There is nothing wrong in a snack&mdash;especially
  a snack with a decent man.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What did I say to you when last you got drunk?&rdquo; asked Chichikov. &ldquo;Have
  you forgotten what I said then?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, barin. HOW could I forget it? I know what is what, and know that
  it is not right to get drunk. All that I have been having is a word or two
  with a decent man, for the reason that&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, if I lay the whip about you, you&rsquo;ll know then how to talk to a
  decent fellow, I&rsquo;ll warrant!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;As you please, barin,&rdquo; replied the complacent Selifan. &ldquo;Should you whip
  me, you will whip me, and I shall have nothing to complain of. Why should
  you not whip me if I deserve it? &lsquo;Tis for you to do as you like. Whippings
  are necessary sometimes, for a peasant often plays the fool, and
  discipline ought to be maintained. If I have deserved it, beat me. Why
  should you not?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  This reasoning seemed, at the moment, irrefutable, and Chichikov said
  nothing more. Fortunately fate had decided to take pity on the pair, for
  from afar their ears caught the barking of a dog. Plucking up courage,
  Chichikov gave orders for the britchka to be righted, and the horses to be
  urged forward; and since a Russian driver has at least this merit, that,
  owing to a keen sense of smell being able to take the place of eyesight,
  he can, if necessary, drive at random and yet reach a destination of some
  sort, Selifan succeeded, though powerless to discern a single object, in
  directing his steeds to a country house near by, and that with such a
  certainty of instinct that it was not until the shafts had collided with a
  garden wall, and thereby made it clear that to proceed another pace was
  impossible, that he stopped. All that Chichikov could discern through the
  thick veil of pouring rain was something which resembled a verandah. So he
  dispatched Selifan to search for the entrance gates, and that process
  would have lasted indefinitely had it not been shortened by the
  circumstance that, in Russia, the place of a Swiss footman is frequently
  taken by watchdogs; of which animals a number now proclaimed the
  travellers&rsquo; presence so loudly that Chichikov found himself forced to stop
  his ears. Next, a light gleamed in one of the windows, and filtered in a
  thin stream to the garden wall&mdash;thus revealing the whereabouts of the
  entrance gates; whereupon Selifan fell to knocking at the gates until the
  bolts of the house door were withdrawn and there issued therefrom a figure
  clad in a rough cloak.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who is that knocking? What have you come for?&rdquo; shouted the hoarse voice
  of an elderly woman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;We are travellers, good mother,&rdquo; said Chichikov. &ldquo;Pray allow us to spend
  the night here.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Out upon you for a pair of gadabouts!&rdquo; retorted the old woman. &ldquo;A fine
  time of night to be arriving! We don&rsquo;t keep an hotel, mind you. This is a
  lady&rsquo;s residence.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But what are we to do, mother? We have lost our way, and cannot spend the
  night out of doors in such weather.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, we cannot. The night is dark and cold,&rdquo; added Selifan.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hold your tongue, you fool!&rdquo; exclaimed Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who ARE you, then?&rdquo; inquired the old woman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A dvorianin <a href="#linknote-12" name="linknoteref-12"
   id="linknoteref-12"><small>12</small></a>, good mother.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Somehow the word dvorianin seemed to give the old woman food for thought.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Wait a moment,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;and I will tell the mistress.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Two minutes later she returned with a lantern in her hand, the gates were
  opened, and a light glimmered in a second window. Entering the courtyard,
  the britchka halted before a moderate-sized mansion. The darkness did not
  permit of very accurate observation being made, but, apparently, the
  windows only of one-half of the building were illuminated, while a
  quagmire in front of the door reflected the beams from the same. Meanwhile
  the rain continued to beat sonorously down upon the wooden roof, and could
  be heard trickling into a water butt; nor for a single moment did the dogs
  cease to bark with all the strength of their lungs. One of them, throwing
  up its head, kept venting a howl of such energy and duration that the
  animal seemed to be howling for a handsome wager; while another, cutting
  in between the yelpings of the first animal, kept restlessly reiterating,
  like a postman&rsquo;s bell, the notes of a very young puppy. Finally, an old
  hound which appeared to be gifted with a peculiarly robust temperament
  kept supplying the part of contrabasso, so that his growls resembled the
  rumbling of a bass singer when a chorus is in full cry, and the tenors are
  rising on tiptoe in their efforts to compass a particularly high note, and
  the whole body of choristers are wagging their heads before approaching a
  climax, and this contrabasso alone is tucking his bearded chin into his
  collar, and sinking almost to a squatting posture on the floor, in order
  to produce a note which shall cause the windows to shiver and their panes
  to crack. Naturally, from a canine chorus of such executants it might
  reasonably be inferred that the establishment was one of the utmost
  respectability. To that, however, our damp, cold hero gave not a thought,
  for all his mind was fixed upon bed. Indeed, the britchka had hardly come
  to a standstill before he leapt out upon the doorstep, missed his footing,
  and came within an ace of falling. To meet him there issued a female
  younger than the first, but very closely resembling her; and on his being
  conducted to the parlour, a couple of glances showed him that the room was
  hung with old striped curtains, and ornamented with pictures of birds and
  small, antique mirrors&mdash;the latter set in dark frames which were
  carved to resemble scrolls of foliage. Behind each mirror was stuck either
  a letter or an old pack of cards or a stocking, while on the wall hung a
  clock with a flowered dial. More, however, Chichikov could not discern,
  for his eyelids were as heavy as though smeared with treacle. Presently
  the lady of the house herself entered&mdash;an elderly woman in a sort of
  nightcap (hastily put on) and a flannel neck wrap. She belonged to that
  class of lady landowners who are for ever lamenting failures of the
  harvest and their losses thereby; to the class who, drooping their heads
  despondently, are all the while stuffing money into striped purses, which
  they keep hoarded in the drawers of cupboards. Into one purse they will
  stuff rouble pieces, into another half roubles, and into a third
  tchetvertachki <a href="#linknote-13" name="linknoteref-13"
   id="linknoteref-13"><small>13</small></a>, although from their mien you
  would suppose that the cupboard contained only linen and nightshirts and
  skeins of wool and the piece of shabby material which is destined&mdash;should
  the old gown become scorched during the baking of holiday cakes and other
  dainties, or should it fall into pieces of itself&mdash;to become
  converted into a new dress. But the gown never does get burnt or wear out,
  for the reason that the lady is too careful; wherefore the piece of shabby
  material reposes in its unmade-up condition until the priest advises that
  it be given to the niece of some widowed sister, together with a quantity
  of other such rubbish.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov apologised for having disturbed the household with his
  unexpected arrival.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Not at all, not at all,&rdquo; replied the lady. &ldquo;But in what dreadful weather
  God has brought you hither! What wind and what rain! You could not help
  losing your way. Pray excuse us for being unable to make better
  preparations for you at this time of night.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Suddenly there broke in upon the hostess&rsquo; words the sound of a strange
  hissing, a sound so loud that the guest started in alarm, and the more so
  seeing that it increased until the room seemed filled with adders. On
  glancing upwards, however, he recovered his composure, for he perceived
  the sound to be emanating from the clock, which appeared to be in a mind
  to strike. To the hissing sound there succeeded a wheezing one, until,
  putting forth its best efforts, the thing struck two with as much clatter
  as though some one had been hitting an iron pot with a cudgel. That done,
  the pendulum returned to its right-left, right-left oscillation.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov thanked his hostess kindly, and said that he needed nothing, and
  she must not put herself about: only for rest was he longing&mdash;though
  also he should like to know whither he had arrived, and whether the
  distance to the country house of land-owner Sobakevitch was anything very
  great. To this the lady replied that she had never so much as heard the
  name, since no gentleman of the name resided in the locality.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But at least you are acquainted with landowner Manilov?&rdquo; continued
  Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No. Who is he?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Another landed proprietor, madam.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, neither have I heard of him. No such landowner lives hereabouts.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then who ARE your local landowners?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Bobrov, Svinin, Kanapatiev, Khapakin, Trepakin, and Plieshakov.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Are they rich men?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, none of them. One of them may own twenty souls, and another thirty,
  but of gentry who own a hundred there are none.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov reflected that he had indeed fallen into an aristocratic
  wilderness!
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;At all events, is the town far away?&rdquo; he inquired.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;About sixty versts. How sorry I am that I have nothing for you to eat!
  Should you care to drink some tea?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I thank you, good mother, but I require nothing beyond a bed.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, after such a journey you must indeed be needing rest, so you shall
  lie upon this sofa. Fetinia, bring a quilt and some pillows and sheets.
  What weather God has sent us! And what dreadful thunder! Ever since sunset
  I have had a candle burning before the ikon in my bedroom. My God! Why,
  your back and sides are as muddy as a boar&rsquo;s! However have you managed to
  get into such a state?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That I am nothing worse than muddy is indeed fortunate, since, but for
  the Almighty, I should have had my ribs broken.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Dear, dear! To think of all that you must have been through. Had I not
  better wipe your back?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I thank you, I thank you, but you need not trouble. Merely be so good as
  to tell your maid to dry my clothes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do you hear that, Fetinia?&rdquo; said the hostess, turning to a woman who was
  engaged in dragging in a feather bed and deluging the room with feathers.
  &ldquo;Take this coat and this vest, and, after drying them before the fire&mdash;just
  as we used to do for your late master&mdash;give them a good rub, and fold
  them up neatly.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well, mistress,&rdquo; said Fetinia, spreading some sheets over the bed,
  and arranging the pillows.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Now your bed is ready for you,&rdquo; said the hostess to Chichikov.
  &ldquo;Good-night, dear sir. I wish you good-night. Is there anything else that
  you require? Perhaps you would like to have your heels tickled before
  retiring to rest? Never could my late husband get to sleep without that
  having been done.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  But the guest declined the proffered heel-tickling, and, on his hostess
  taking her departure, hastened to divest himself of his clothing, both
  upper and under, and to hand the garments to Fetinia. She wished him
  good-night, and removed the wet trappings; after which he found himself
  alone. Not without satisfaction did he eye his bed, which reached almost
  to the ceiling. Clearly Fetinia was a past mistress in the art of beating
  up such a couch, and, as the result, he had no sooner mounted it with the
  aid of a chair than it sank well-nigh to the floor, and the feathers,
  squeezed out of their proper confines, flew hither and thither into every
  corner of the apartment. Nevertheless he extinguished the candle, covered
  himself over with the chintz quilt, snuggled down beneath it, and
  instantly fell asleep. Next day it was late in the morning before he
  awoke. Through the window the sun was shining into his eyes, and the flies
  which, overnight, had been roosting quietly on the walls and ceiling now
  turned their attention to the visitor. One settled on his lip, another on
  his ear, a third hovered as though intending to lodge in his very eye, and
  a fourth had the temerity to alight just under his nostrils. In his drowsy
  condition he inhaled the latter insect, sneezed violently, and so returned
  to consciousness. He glanced around the room, and perceived that not all
  the pictures were representative of birds, since among them hung also a
  portrait of Kutuzov <a href="#linknote-14" name="linknoteref-14"
   id="linknoteref-14"><small>14</small></a> and an oil painting of an old
  man in a uniform with red facings such as were worn in the days of the
  Emperor Paul <a href="#linknote-15" name="linknoteref-15"
   id="linknoteref-15"><small>15</small></a>. At this moment the clock
  uttered its usual hissing sound, and struck ten, while a woman&rsquo;s face
  peered in at the door, but at once withdrew, for the reason that, with the
  object of sleeping as well as possible, Chichikov had removed every stitch
  of his clothing. Somehow the face seemed to him familiar, and he set
  himself to recall whose it could be. At length he recollected that it was
  the face of his hostess. His clothes he found lying, clean and dry, beside
  him; so he dressed and approached the mirror, meanwhile sneezing again
  with such vehemence that a cock which happened at the moment to be near
  the window (which was situated at no great distance from the ground)
  chuckled a short, sharp phrase. Probably it meant, in the bird&rsquo;s alien
  tongue, &ldquo;Good morning to you!&rdquo; Chichikov retorted by calling the bird a
  fool, and then himself approached the window to look at the view. It
  appeared to comprise a poulterer&rsquo;s premises. At all events, the narrow
  yard in front of the window was full of poultry and other domestic
  creatures&mdash;of game fowls and barn door fowls, with, among them, a
  cock which strutted with measured gait, and kept shaking its comb, and
  tilting its head as though it were trying to listen to something. Also, a
  sow and her family were helping to grace the scene. First, she rooted
  among a heap of litter; then, in passing, she ate up a young pullet;
  lastly, she proceeded carelessly to munch some pieces of melon rind. To
  this small yard or poultry-run a length of planking served as a fence,
  while beyond it lay a kitchen garden containing cabbages, onions,
  potatoes, beetroots, and other household vegetables. Also, the garden
  contained a few stray fruit trees that were covered with netting to
  protect them from the magpies and sparrows; flocks of which were even then
  wheeling and darting from one spot to another. For the same reason a
  number of scarecrows with outstretched arms stood reared on long poles,
  with, surmounting one of the figures, a cast-off cap of the hostess&rsquo;s.
  Beyond the garden again there stood a number of peasants&rsquo; huts. Though
  scattered, instead of being arranged in regular rows, these appeared to
  Chichikov&rsquo;s eye to comprise well-to-do inhabitants, since all rotten
  planks in their roofing had been replaced with new ones, and none of their
  doors were askew, and such of their tiltsheds as faced him evinced
  evidence of a presence of a spare waggon&mdash;in some cases almost a new
  one.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This lady owns by no means a poor village,&rdquo; said Chichikov to himself;
  wherefore he decided then and there to have a talk with his hostess, and
  to cultivate her closer acquaintance. Accordingly he peeped through the
  chink of the door whence her head had recently protruded, and, on seeing
  her seated at a tea table, entered and greeted her with a cheerful, kindly
  smile.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good morning, dear sir,&rdquo; she responded as she rose. &ldquo;How have you slept?&rdquo;
   She was dressed in better style than she had been on the previous evening.
  That is to say, she was now wearing a gown of some dark colour, and lacked
  her nightcap, and had swathed her neck in something stiff.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have slept exceedingly well,&rdquo; replied Chichikov, seating himself upon a
  chair. &ldquo;And how are YOU, good madam?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But poorly, my dear sir.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And why so?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because I cannot sleep. A pain has taken me in my middle, and my legs,
  from the ankles upwards, are aching as though they were broken.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That will pass, that will pass, good mother. You must pay no attention to
  it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;God grant that it MAY pass. However, I have been rubbing myself with lard
  and turpentine. What sort of tea will you take? In this jar I have some of
  the scented kind.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Excellent, good mother! Then I will take that.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Probably the reader will have noticed that, for all his expressions of
  solicitude, Chichikov&rsquo;s tone towards his hostess partook of a freer, a
  more unceremonious, nature than that which he had adopted towards Madam
  Manilov. And here I should like to assert that, howsoever much, in certain
  respects, we Russians may be surpassed by foreigners, at least we surpass
  them in adroitness of manner. In fact the various shades and subtleties of
  our social intercourse defy enumeration. A Frenchman or a German would be
  incapable of envisaging and understanding all its peculiarities and
  differences, for his tone in speaking to a millionaire differs but little
  from that which he employs towards a small tobacconist&mdash;and that in
  spite of the circumstance that he is accustomed to cringe before the
  former. With us, however, things are different. In Russian society there
  exist clever folk who can speak in one manner to a landowner possessed of
  two hundred peasant souls, and in another to a landowner possessed of
  three hundred, and in another to a landowner possessed of five hundred. In
  short, up to the number of a million souls the Russian will have ready for
  each landowner a suitable mode of address. For example, suppose that
  somewhere there exists a government office, and that in that office there
  exists a director. I would beg of you to contemplate him as he sits among
  his myrmidons. Sheer nervousness will prevent you from uttering a word in
  his presence, so great are the pride and superiority depicted on his
  countenance. Also, were you to sketch him, you would be sketching a
  veritable Prometheus, for his glance is as that of an eagle, and he walks
  with measured, stately stride. Yet no sooner will the eagle have left the
  room to seek the study of his superior officer than he will go scurrying
  along (papers held close to his nose) like any partridge. But in society,
  and at the evening party (should the rest of those present be of lesser
  rank than himself) the Prometheus will once more become Prometheus, and
  the man who stands a step below him will treat him in a way never dreamt
  of by Ovid, seeing that each fly is of lesser account than its superior
  fly, and becomes, in the presence of the latter, even as a grain of sand.
  &ldquo;Surely that is not Ivan Petrovitch?&rdquo; you will say of such and such a man
  as you regard him. &ldquo;Ivan Petrovitch is tall, whereas this man is small and
  spare. Ivan Petrovitch has a loud, deep voice, and never smiles, whereas
  this man (whoever he may be) is twittering like a sparrow, and smiling all
  the time.&rdquo; Yet approach and take a good look at the fellow and you will
  see that is IS Ivan Petrovitch. &ldquo;Alack, alack!&rdquo; will be the only remark
  you can make.
</p>
<p>
  Let us return to our characters in real life. We have seen that, on this
  occasion, Chichikov decided to dispense with ceremony; wherefore, taking
  up the teapot, he went on as follows:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You have a nice little village here, madam. How many souls does it
  contain?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A little less than eighty, dear sir. But the times are hard, and I have
  lost a great deal through last year&rsquo;s harvest having proved a failure.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But your peasants look fine, strong fellows. May I enquire your name?
  Through arriving so late at night I have quite lost my wits.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Korobotchka, the widow of a Collegiate Secretary.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I humbly thank you. And your Christian name and patronymic?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nastasia Petrovna.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nastasia Petrovna! Those are excellent names. I have a maternal aunt
  named like yourself.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And YOUR name?&rdquo; queried the lady. &ldquo;May I take it that you are a
  Government Assessor?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, madam,&rdquo; replied Chichikov with a smile. &ldquo;I am not an Assessor, but a
  traveller on private business.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you must be a buyer of produce? How I regret that I have sold my
  honey so cheaply to other buyers! Otherwise YOU might have bought it, dear
  sir.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I never buy honey.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then WHAT do you buy, pray? Hemp? I have a little of that by me, but not
  more than half a pood <a href="#linknote-16" name="linknoteref-16"
   id="linknoteref-16"><small>16</small></a> or so.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, madam. It is in other wares that I deal. Tell me, have you, of late
  years, lost many of your peasants by death?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes; no fewer than eighteen,&rdquo; responded the old lady with a sigh. &ldquo;Such a
  fine lot, too&mdash;all good workers! True, others have since grown up,
  but of what use are THEY? Mere striplings. When the Assessor last called
  upon me I could have wept; for, though those workmen of mine are dead, I
  have to keep on paying for them as though they were still alive! And only
  last week my blacksmith got burnt to death! Such a clever hand at his
  trade he was!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What? A fire occurred at your place?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, God preserve us all! It was not so bad as that. You must
  understand that the blacksmith SET HIMSELF on fire&mdash;he got set on
  fire in his bowels through overdrinking. Yes, all of a sudden there burst
  from him a blue flame, and he smouldered and smouldered until he had
  turned as black as a piece of charcoal! Yet what a clever blacksmith he
  was! And now I have no horses to drive out with, for there is no one to
  shoe them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;In everything the will of God, madam,&rdquo; said Chichikov with a sigh.
  &ldquo;Against the divine wisdom it is not for us to rebel. Pray hand them over
  to me, Nastasia Petrovna.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hand over whom?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The dead peasants.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But how could I do that?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Quite simply. Sell them to me, and I will give you some money in
  exchange.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But how am I to sell them to you? I scarcely understand what you mean. Am
  I to dig them up again from the ground?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov perceived that the old lady was altogether at sea, and that he
  must explain the matter; wherefore in a few words he informed her that the
  transfer or purchase of the souls in question would take place merely on
  paper&mdash;that the said souls would be listed as still alive.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And what good would they be to you?&rdquo; asked his hostess, staring at him
  with her eyes distended.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That is MY affair.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But they are DEAD souls.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who said they were not? The mere fact of their being dead entails upon
  you a loss as dead as the souls, for you have to continue paying tax upon
  them, whereas MY plan is to relieve you both of the tax and of the
  resultant trouble. NOW do you understand? And I will not only do as I say,
  but also hand you over fifteen roubles per soul. Is that clear enough?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes&mdash;but I do not know,&rdquo; said his hostess diffidently. &ldquo;You see,
  never before have I sold dead souls.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Quite so. It would be a surprising thing if you had. But surely you do
  not think that these dead souls are in the least worth keeping?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, no, indeed! Why should they be worth keeping? I am sure they are not
  so. The only thing which troubles me is the fact that they are DEAD.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;She seems a truly obstinate old woman!&rdquo; was Chichikov&rsquo;s inward comment.
  &ldquo;Look here, madam,&rdquo; he added aloud. &ldquo;You reason well, but you are simply
  ruining yourself by continuing to pay the tax upon dead souls as though
  they were still alive.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, good sir, do not speak of it!&rdquo; the lady exclaimed. &ldquo;Three weeks ago I
  took a hundred and fifty roubles to that Assessor, and buttered him up,
  and&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you see how it is, do you not? Remember that, according to my plan,
  you will never again have to butter up the Assessor, seeing that it will
  be I who will be paying for those peasants&mdash;<i>I</i>, not YOU, for I
  shall have taken over the dues upon them, and have transferred them to
  myself as so many bona fide serfs. Do you understand AT LAST?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  However, the old lady still communed with herself. She could see that the
  transaction would be to her advantage, yet it was one of such a novel and
  unprecedented nature that she was beginning to fear lest this purchaser of
  souls intended to cheat her. Certainly he had come from God only knew
  where, and at the dead of night, too!
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But, sir, I have never in my life sold dead folk&mdash;only living ones.
  Three years ago I transferred two wenches to Protopopov for a hundred
  roubles apiece, and he thanked me kindly, for they turned out splendid
  workers&mdash;able to make napkins or anything else.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, but with the living we have nothing to do, damn it! I am asking you
  only about DEAD folk.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, yes, of course. But at first sight I felt afraid lest I should be
  incurring a loss&mdash;lest you should be wishing to outwit me, good sir.
  You see, the dead souls are worth rather more than you have offered for
  them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;See here, madam. (What a woman it is!) HOW could they be worth more?
  Think for yourself. They are so much loss to you&mdash;so much loss, do
  you understand? Take any worthless, rubbishy article you like&mdash;a
  piece of old rag, for example. That rag will yet fetch its price, for it
  can be bought for paper-making. But these dead souls are good for NOTHING
  AT ALL. Can you name anything that they ARE good for?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;True, true&mdash;they ARE good for nothing. But what troubles me is the
  fact that they are dead.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a blockhead of a creature!&rdquo; said Chichikov to himself, for he was
  beginning to lose patience. &ldquo;Bless her heart, I may as well be going. She
  has thrown me into a perfect sweat, the cursed old shrew!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He took a handkerchief from his pocket, and wiped the perspiration from
  his brow. Yet he need not have flown into such a passion. More than one
  respected statesman reveals himself, when confronted with a business
  matter, to be just such another as Madam Korobotchka, in that, once he has
  got an idea into his head, there is no getting it out of him&mdash;you may
  ply him with daylight-clear arguments, yet they will rebound from his
  brain as an india-rubber ball rebounds from a flagstone. Nevertheless,
  wiping away the perspiration, Chichikov resolved to try whether he could
  not bring her back to the road by another path.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Madam,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;either you are declining to understand what I say or
  you are talking for the mere sake of talking. If I hand you over some
  money&mdash;fifteen roubles for each soul, do you understand?&mdash;it is
  MONEY, not something which can be picked up haphazard on the street. For
  instance, tell me how much you sold your honey for?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;For twelve roubles per pood.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah! Then by those words, madam, you have laid a trifling sin upon your
  soul; for you did NOT sell the honey for twelve roubles.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;By the Lord God I did!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, well! Never mind. Honey is only honey. Now, you had collected that
  stuff, it may be, for a year, and with infinite care and labour. You had
  fussed after it, you had trotted to and fro, you had duly frozen out the
  bees, and you had fed them in the cellar throughout the winter. But these
  dead souls of which I speak are quite another matter, for in this case you
  have put forth no exertions&mdash;it was merely God&rsquo;s will that they
  should leave the world, and thus decrease the personnel of your
  establishment. In the former case you received (so you allege) twelve
  roubles per pood for your labour; but in this case you will receive money
  for having done nothing at all. Nor will you receive twelve roubles per
  item, but FIFTEEN&mdash;and roubles not in silver, but roubles in good
  paper currency.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  That these powerful inducements would certainly cause the old woman to
  yield Chichikov had not a doubt.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;True,&rdquo; his hostess replied. &ldquo;But how strangely business comes to me as a
  widow! Perhaps I had better wait a little longer, seeing that other buyers
  might come along, and I might be able to compare prices.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;For shame, madam! For shame! Think what you are saying. Who else, I would
  ask, would care to buy those souls? What use could they be to any one?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;If that is so, they might come in useful to ME,&rdquo; mused the old woman
  aloud; after which she sat staring at Chichikov with her mouth open and a
  face of nervous expectancy as to his possible rejoinder.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Dead folk useful in a household!&rdquo; he exclaimed. &ldquo;Why, what could you do
  with them? Set them up on poles to frighten away the sparrows from your
  garden?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The Lord save us, but what things you say!&rdquo; she ejaculated, crossing
  herself.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, WHAT could you do with them? By this time they are so much bones
  and earth. That is all there is left of them. Their transfer to myself
  would be ON PAPER only. Come, come! At least give me an answer.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Again the old woman communed with herself.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What are you thinking of, Nastasia Petrovna?&rdquo; inquired Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am thinking that I scarcely know what to do. Perhaps I had better sell
  you some hemp?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What do I want with hemp? Pardon me, but just when I have made to you a
  different proposal altogether you begin fussing about hemp! Hemp is hemp,
  and though I may want some when I NEXT visit you, I should like to know
  what you have to say to the suggestion under discussion.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, I think it a very queer bargain. Never have I heard of such a
  thing.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Upon this Chichikov lost all patience, upset his chair, and bid her go to
  the devil; of which personage even the mere mention terrified her
  extremely.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do not speak of him, I beg of you!&rdquo; she cried, turning pale. &ldquo;May God,
  rather, bless him! Last night was the third night that he has appeared to
  me in a dream. You see, after saying my prayers, I bethought me of telling
  my fortune by the cards; and God must have sent him as a punishment. He
  looked so horrible, and had horns longer than a bull&rsquo;s!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I wonder you don&rsquo;t see SCORES of devils in your dreams! Merely out of
  Christian charity he had come to you to say, &lsquo;I perceive a poor widow
  going to rack and ruin, and likely soon to stand in danger of want.&rsquo; Well,
  go to rack and ruin&mdash;yes, you and all your village together!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The insults!&rdquo; exclaimed the old woman, glancing at her visitor in terror.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I should think so!&rdquo; continued Chichikov. &ldquo;Indeed, I cannot find words to
  describe you. To say no more about it, you are like a dog in a manger. You
  don&rsquo;t want to eat the hay yourself, yet you won&rsquo;t let anyone else touch
  it. All that I am seeking to do is to purchase certain domestic products
  of yours, for the reason that I have certain Government contracts to
  fulfil.&rdquo; This last he added in passing, and without any ulterior motive,
  save that it came to him as a happy thought. Nevertheless the mention of
  Government contracts exercised a powerful influence upon Nastasia
  Petrovna, and she hastened to say in a tone that was almost supplicatory:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why should you be so angry with me? Had I known that you were going to
  lose your temper in this way, I should never have discussed the matter.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No wonder that I lose my temper! An egg too many is no great matter, yet
  it may prove exceedingly annoying.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, well, I will let you have the souls for fifteen roubles each. Also,
  with regard to those contracts, do not forget me if at any time you should
  find yourself in need of rye-meal or buckwheat or groats or dead meat.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, I shall NEVER forget you, madam!&rdquo; he said, wiping his forehead, where
  three separate streams of perspiration were trickling down his face. Then
  he asked her whether in the town she had any acquaintance or agent whom
  she could empower to complete the transference of the serfs, and to carry
  out whatsoever else might be necessary.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Certainly,&rdquo; replied Madame Korobotchka. &ldquo;The son of our archpriest,
  Father Cyril, himself is a lawyer.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Upon that Chichikov begged her to accord the gentleman in question a power
  of attorney, while, to save extra trouble, he himself would then and there
  compose the requisite letter.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It would be a fine thing if he were to buy up all my meal and stock for
  the Government,&rdquo; thought Madame to herself. &ldquo;I must encourage him a
  little. There has been some dough standing ready since last night, so I
  will go and tell Fetinia to try a few pancakes. Also, it might be well to
  try him with an egg pie. We make then nicely here, and they do not take
  long in the making.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  So she departed to translate her thoughts into action, as well as to
  supplement the pie with other products of the domestic cuisine; while, for
  his part, Chichikov returned to the drawing-room where he had spent the
  night, in order to procure from his dispatch-box the necessary
  writing-paper. The room had now been set in order, the sumptuous feather
  bed removed, and a table set before the sofa. Depositing his dispatch-box
  upon the table, he heaved a gentle sigh on becoming aware that he was so
  soaked with perspiration that he might almost have been dipped in a river.
  Everything, from his shirt to his socks, was dripping. &ldquo;May she starve to
  death, the cursed old harridan!&rdquo; he ejaculated after a moment&rsquo;s rest. Then
  he opened his dispatch-box. In passing, I may say that I feel certain that
  at least SOME of my readers will be curious to know the contents and the
  internal arrangements of that receptacle. Why should I not gratify their
  curiosity? To begin with, the centre of the box contained a soap-dish,
  with, disposed around it, six or seven compartments for razors. Next came
  square partitions for a sand-box <a href="#linknote-17"
   name="linknoteref-17" id="linknoteref-17"><small>17</small></a> and an
  inkstand, as well as (scooped out in their midst) a hollow of pens,
  sealing-wax, and anything else that required more room. Lastly there were
  all sorts of little divisions, both with and without lids, for articles of
  a smaller nature, such as visiting cards, memorial cards, theatre tickets,
  and things which Chichikov had laid by as souvenirs. This portion of the
  box could be taken out, and below it were both a space for manuscripts and
  a secret money-box&mdash;the latter made to draw out from the side of the
  receptacle.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov set to work to clean a pen, and then to write. Presently his
  hostess entered the room.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a beautiful box you have got, my dear sir!&rdquo; she exclaimed as she
  took a seat beside him. &ldquo;Probably you bought it in Moscow?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes&mdash;in Moscow,&rdquo; replied Chichikov without interrupting his writing.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I thought so. One CAN get good things there. Three years ago my sister
  brought me a few pairs of warm shoes for my sons, and they were such
  excellent articles! To this day my boys wear them. And what nice stamped
  paper you have!&rdquo; (she had peered into the dispatch-box, where, sure
  enough, there lay a further store of the paper in question). &ldquo;Would you
  mind letting me have a sheet of it? I am without any at all, although I
  shall soon have to be presenting a plea to the land court, and possess not
  a morsel of paper to write it on.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Upon this Chichikov explained that the paper was not the sort proper for
  the purpose&mdash;that it was meant for serf-indenturing, and not for the
  framing of pleas. Nevertheless, to quiet her, he gave her a sheet stamped
  to the value of a rouble. Next, he handed her the letter to sign, and
  requested, in return, a list of her peasants. Unfortunately, such a list
  had never been compiled, let alone any copies of it, and the only way in
  which she knew the peasants&rsquo; names was by heart. However, he told her to
  dictate them. Some of the names greatly astonished our hero, so, still
  more, did the surnames. Indeed, frequently, on hearing the latter, he had
  to pause before writing them down. Especially did he halt before a certain
  &ldquo;Peter Saveliev Neuvazhai Korito.&rdquo; &ldquo;What a string of titles!&rdquo;
   involuntarily he ejaculated. To the Christian name of another serf was
  appended &ldquo;Korovi Kirpitch,&rdquo; and to that of a third &ldquo;Koleso Ivan.&rdquo; However,
  at length the list was compiled, and he caught a deep breath; which latter
  proceeding caused him to catch also the attractive odour of something
  fried in fat.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I beseech you to have a morsel,&rdquo; murmured his hostess. Chichikov looked
  up, and saw that the table was spread with mushrooms, pies, and other
  viands.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Try this freshly-made pie and an egg,&rdquo; continued Madame.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov did so, and having eaten more than half of what she offered him,
  praised the pie highly. Indeed, it was a toothsome dish, and, after his
  difficulties and exertions with his hostess, it tasted even better than it
  might otherwise have done.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And also a few pancakes?&rdquo; suggested Madame.
</p>
<p>
  For answer Chichikov folded three together, and, having dipped them in
  melted butter, consigned the lot to his mouth, and then wiped his mouth
  with a napkin. Twice more was the process repeated, and then he requested
  his hostess to order the britchka to be got ready. In dispatching Fetinia
  with the necessary instructions, she ordered her to return with a second
  batch of hot pancakes.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your pancakes are indeed splendid,&rdquo; said Chichikov, applying himself to
  the second consignment of fried dainties when they had arrived.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, we make them well here,&rdquo; replied Madame. &ldquo;Yet how unfortunate it is
  that the harvest should have proved so poor as to have prevented me from
  earning anything on my&mdash;But why should you be in such a hurry to
  depart, good sir?&rdquo; She broke off on seeing Chichikov reach for his cap.
  &ldquo;The britchka is not yet ready.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then it is being got so, madam, it is being got so, and I shall need a
  moment or two to pack my things.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;As you please, dear sir; but do not forget me in connection with those
  Government contracts.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, I have said that NEVER shall I forget you,&rdquo; replied Chichikov as he
  hurried into the hall.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And would you like to buy some lard?&rdquo; continued his hostess, pursuing
  him.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Lard? Oh certainly. Why not? Only, only&mdash;I will do so ANOTHER time.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I shall have some ready at about Christmas.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Quite so, madam. THEN I will buy anything and everything&mdash;the lard
  included.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And perhaps you will be wanting also some feathers? I shall be having
  some for sale about St. Philip&rsquo;s Day.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well, very well, madam.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;There you see!&rdquo; she remarked as they stepped out on to the verandah. &ldquo;The
  britchka is NOT yet ready.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But it soon will be, it soon will be. Only direct me to the main road.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How am I to do that?&rdquo; said Madame. &ldquo;&lsquo;Twould puzzle a wise man to do so,
  for in these parts there are so many turnings. However, I will send a girl
  to guide you. You could find room for her on the box-seat, could you not?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, of course.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then I will send her. She knows the way thoroughly. Only do not carry her
  off for good. Already some traders have deprived me of one of my girls.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov reassured his hostess on the point, and Madame plucked up
  courage enough to scan, first of all, the housekeeper, who happened to be
  issuing from the storehouse with a bowl of honey, and, next, a young
  peasant who happened to be standing at the gates; and, while thus engaged,
  she became wholly absorbed in her domestic pursuits. But why pay her so
  much attention? The Widow Korobotchka, Madame Manilov, domestic life,
  non-domestic life&mdash;away with them all! How strangely are things
  compounded! In a trice may joy turn to sorrow, should one halt long enough
  over it: in a trice only God can say what ideas may strike one. You may
  fall even to thinking: &ldquo;After all, did Madame Korobotchka stand so very
  low in the scale of human perfection? Was there really such a very great
  gulf between her and Madame Manilov&mdash;between her and the Madame
  Manilov whom we have seen entrenched behind the walls of a genteel mansion
  in which there were a fine staircase of wrought metal and a number of rich
  carpets; the Madame Manilov who spent most of her time in yawning behind
  half-read books, and in hoping for a visit from some socially
  distinguished person in order that she might display her wit and carefully
  rehearsed thoughts&mdash;thoughts which had been de rigeur in town for a
  week past, yet which referred, not to what was going on in her household
  or on her estate&mdash;both of which properties were at odds and ends,
  owing to her ignorance of the art of managing them&mdash;but to the coming
  political revolution in France and the direction in which fashionable
  Catholicism was supposed to be moving? But away with such things! Why need
  we speak of them? Yet how comes it that suddenly into the midst of our
  careless, frivolous, unthinking moments there may enter another, and a
  very different, tendency?&mdash;that the smile may not have left a human
  face before its owner will have radically changed his or her nature
  (though not his or her environment) with the result that the face will
  suddenly become lit with a radiance never before seen there?...
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Here is the britchka, here is the britchka!&rdquo; exclaimed Chichikov on
  perceiving that vehicle slowly advancing. &ldquo;Ah, you blockhead!&rdquo; he went on
  to Selifan. &ldquo;Why have you been loitering about? I suppose last night&rsquo;s
  fumes have not yet left your brain?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  To this Selifan returned no reply.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good-bye, madam,&rdquo; added the speaker. &ldquo;But where is the girl whom you
  promised me?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Here, Pelagea!&rdquo; called the hostess to a wench of about eleven who was
  dressed in home-dyed garments and could boast of a pair of bare feet
  which, from a distance, might almost have been mistaken for boots, so
  encrusted were they with fresh mire. &ldquo;Here, Pelagea! Come and show this
  gentleman the way.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Selifan helped the girl to ascend to the box-seat. Placing one foot upon
  the step by which the gentry mounted, she covered the said step with mud,
  and then, ascending higher, attained the desired position beside the
  coachman. Chichikov followed in her wake (causing the britchka to heel
  over with his weight as he did so), and then settled himself back into his
  place with an &ldquo;All right! Good-bye, madam!&rdquo; as the horses moved away at a
  trot.
</p>
<p>
  Selifan looked gloomy as he drove, but also very attentive to his
  business. This was invariably his custom when he had committed the fault
  of getting drunk. Also, the horses looked unusually well-groomed. In
  particular, the collar on one of them had been neatly mended, although
  hitherto its state of dilapidation had been such as perennially to allow
  the stuffing to protrude through the leather. The silence preserved was
  well-nigh complete. Merely flourishing his whip, Selifan spoke to the team
  no word of instruction, although the skewbald was as ready as usual to
  listen to conversation of a didactic nature, seeing that at such times the
  reins hung loosely in the hands of the loquacious driver, and the whip
  wandered merely as a matter of form over the backs of the troika. This
  time, however, there could be heard issuing from Selifan&rsquo;s sullen lips
  only the uniformly unpleasant exclamation, &ldquo;Now then, you brutes! Get on
  with you, get on with you!&rdquo; The bay and the Assessor too felt put out at
  not hearing themselves called &ldquo;my pets&rdquo; or &ldquo;good lads&rdquo;; while, in
  addition, the skewbald came in for some nasty cuts across his sleek and
  ample quarters. &ldquo;What has put master out like this?&rdquo; thought the animal as
  it shook its head. &ldquo;Heaven knows where he does not keep beating me&mdash;across
  the back, and even where I am tenderer still. Yes, he keeps catching the
  whip in my ears, and lashing me under the belly.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;To the right, eh?&rdquo; snapped Selifan to the girl beside him as he pointed
  to a rain-soaked road which trended away through fresh green fields.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no,&rdquo; she replied. &ldquo;I will show you the road when the time comes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Which way, then?&rdquo; he asked again when they had proceeded a little
  further.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This way.&rdquo; And she pointed to the road just mentioned.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Get along with you!&rdquo; retorted the coachman. &ldquo;That DOES go to the right.
  You don&rsquo;t know your right hand from your left.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The weather was fine, but the ground so excessively sodden that the wheels
  of the britchka collected mire until they had become caked as with a layer
  of felt, a circumstance which greatly increased the weight of the vehicle,
  and prevented it from clearing the neighbouring parishes before the
  afternoon was arrived. Also, without the girl&rsquo;s help the finding of the
  way would have been impossible, since roads wiggled away in every
  direction, like crabs released from a net, and, but for the assistance
  mentioned, Selifan would have found himself left to his own devices.
  Presently she pointed to a building ahead, with the words, &ldquo;THERE is the
  main road.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And what is the building?&rdquo; asked Selifan.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A tavern,&rdquo; she said.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then we can get along by ourselves,&rdquo; he observed. &ldquo;Do you get down, and
  be off home.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  With that he stopped, and helped her to alight&mdash;muttering as he did
  so: &ldquo;Ah, you blackfooted creature!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov added a copper groat, and she departed well pleased with her
  ride in the gentleman&rsquo;s carriage.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0004" id="link2HCH0004">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
