<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>
  CHAPTER IX
</h2>
<p>
  Next morning, before the usual hour for paying calls, there tripped from
  the portals of an orange-coloured wooden house with an attic storey and a
  row of blue pillars a lady in an elegant plaid cloak. With her came a
  footman in a many-caped greatcoat and a polished top hat with a gold band.
  Hastily, but gracefully, the lady ascended the steps let down from a
  koliaska which was standing before the entrance, and as soon as she had
  done so the footman shut her in, put up the steps again, and, catching
  hold of the strap behind the vehicle, shouted to the coachman, &ldquo;Right
  away!&rdquo; The reason of all this was that the lady was the possessor of a
  piece of intelligence that she was burning to communicate to a
  fellow-creature. Every moment she kept looking out of the carriage window,
  and perceiving, with almost speechless vexation, that, as yet, she was but
  half-way on her journey. The fronts of the houses appeared to her longer
  than usual, and in particular did the front of the white stone hospital,
  with its rows of narrow windows, seem interminable to a degree which at
  length forced her to ejaculate: &ldquo;Oh, the cursed building! Positively there
  is no end to it!&rdquo; Also, she twice adjured the coachman with the words, &ldquo;Go
  quicker, Andrusha! You are a horribly long time over the journey this
  morning.&rdquo; But at length the goal was reached, and the koliaska stopped
  before a one-storied wooden mansion, dark grey in colour, and having white
  carvings over the windows, a tall wooden fence and narrow garden in front
  of the latter, and a few meagre trees looming white with an incongruous
  coating of road dust. In the windows of the building were also a few
  flower pots and a parrot that kept alternately dancing on the floor of its
  cage and hanging on to the ring of the same with its beak. Also, in the
  sunshine before the door two pet dogs were sleeping. Here there lived the
  lady&rsquo;s bosom friend. As soon as the bosom friend in question learnt of the
  newcomer&rsquo;s arrival, she ran down into the hall, and the two ladies kissed
  and embraced one another. Then they adjourned to the drawing-room.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How glad I am to see you!&rdquo; said the bosom friend. &ldquo;When I heard some one
  arriving I wondered who could possibly be calling so early. Parasha
  declared that it must be the Vice-Governor&rsquo;s wife, so, as I did not want
  to be bored with her, I gave orders that I was to be reported &lsquo;not at
  home.&rsquo;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  For her part, the guest would have liked to have proceeded to business by
  communicating her tidings, but a sudden exclamation from the hostess
  imparted (temporarily) a new direction to the conversation.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a pretty chintz!&rdquo; she cried, gazing at the other&rsquo;s gown.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, it IS pretty,&rdquo; agreed the visitor. &ldquo;On the other hand, Praskovia
  Thedorovna thinks that&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  In other words, the ladies proceeded to indulge in a conversation on the
  subject of dress; and only after this had lasted for a considerable while
  did the visitor let fall a remark which led her entertainer to inquire:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And how is the universal charmer?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;My God!&rdquo; replied the other. &ldquo;There has been SUCH a business! In fact, do
  you know why I am here at all?&rdquo; And the visitor&rsquo;s breathing became more
  hurried, and further words seemed to be hovering between her lips like
  hawks preparing to stoop upon their prey. Only a person of the unhumanity
  of a &ldquo;true friend&rdquo; would have had the heart to interrupt her; but the
  hostess was just such a friend, and at once interposed with:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I wonder how any one can see anything in the man to praise or to admire.
  For my own part, I think&mdash;and I would say the same thing straight to
  his face&mdash;that he is a perfect rascal.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, but do listen to what I have got to tell you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, I know that some people think him handsome,&rdquo; continued the hostess,
  unmoved; &ldquo;but <i>I</i> say that he is nothing of the kind&mdash;that, in
  particular, his nose is perfectly odious.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, but let me finish what I was saying.&rdquo; The guest&rsquo;s tone was almost
  piteous in its appeal.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What is it, then?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You cannot imagine my state of mind! You see, this morning I received a
  visit from Father Cyril&rsquo;s wife&mdash;the Archpriest&rsquo;s wife&mdash;you know
  her, don&rsquo;t you? Well, whom do you suppose that fine gentleman visitor of
  ours has turned out to be?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The man who has built the Archpriest a poultry-run?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh dear no! Had that been all, it would have been nothing. No. Listen to
  what Father Cyril&rsquo;s wife had to tell me. She said that, last night, a lady
  landowner named Madame Korobotchka arrived at the Archpriest&rsquo;s house&mdash;arrived
  all pale and trembling&mdash;and told her, oh, such things! They sound
  like a piece out of a book. That is to say, at dead of night, just when
  every one had retired to rest, there came the most dreadful knocking
  imaginable, and some one screamed out, &lsquo;Open the gates, or we will break
  them down!&rsquo; Just think! After this, how any one can say that the man is
  charming I cannot imagine.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, what of Madame Korobotchka? Is she a young woman or good looking?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh dear no! Quite an old woman.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Splendid indeed! So he is actually engaged to a person like that? One may
  heartily commend the taste of our ladies for having fallen in love with
  him!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nevertheless, it is not as you suppose. Think, now! Armed with weapons
  from head to foot, he called upon this old woman, and said: &lsquo;Sell me any
  souls of yours which have lately died.&rsquo; Of course, Madame Korobotchka
  answered, reasonably enough: &lsquo;I cannot sell you those souls, seeing that
  they have departed this world;&rsquo; but he replied: &lsquo;No, no! They are NOT
  dead. &lsquo;Tis I who tell you that&mdash;I who ought to know the truth of the
  matter. I swear that they are still alive.&rsquo; In short, he made such a scene
  that the whole village came running to the house, and children screamed,
  and men shouted, and no one could tell what it was all about. The affair
  seemed to me so horrible, so utterly horrible, that I trembled beyond
  belief as I listened to the story. &lsquo;My dearest madam,&rsquo; said my maid,
  Mashka, &lsquo;pray look at yourself in the mirror, and see how white you are.&rsquo;
  &lsquo;But I have no time for that,&rsquo; I replied, &lsquo;as I must be off to tell my
  friend, Anna Grigorievna, the news.&rsquo; Nor did I lose a moment in ordering
  the koliaska. Yet when my coachman, Andrusha, asked me for directions I
  could not get a word out&mdash;I just stood staring at him like a fool,
  until I thought he must think me mad. Oh, Anna Grigorievna, if you but
  knew how upset I am!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a strange affair!&rdquo; commented the hostess. &ldquo;What on earth can the man
  have meant by &lsquo;dead souls&rsquo;? I confess that the words pass my
  understanding. Curiously enough, this is the second time I have heard
  speak of those souls. True, my husband avers that Nozdrev was lying; yet
  in his lies there seems to have been a grain of truth.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, just think of my state when I heard all this! &lsquo;And now,&rsquo; apparently
  said Korobotchka to the Archpriest&rsquo;s wife, &lsquo;I am altogether at a loss what
  to do, for, throwing me fifteen roubles, the man forced me to sign a
  worthless paper&mdash;yes, me, an inexperienced, defenceless widow who
  knows nothing of business.&rsquo; That such things should happen! TRY and
  imagine my feelings!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;In my opinion, there is in this more than the dead souls which meet the
  eye.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I think so too,&rdquo; agreed the other. As a matter of fact, her friend&rsquo;s
  remark had struck her with complete surprise, as well as filled her with
  curiosity to know what the word &ldquo;more&rdquo; might possibly signify. In fact,
  she felt driven to inquire: &ldquo;What do YOU suppose to be hidden beneath it
  all?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No; tell me what YOU suppose?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What <i>I</i> suppose? I am at a loss to conjecture.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, but tell me what is in your mind?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Upon this the visitor had to confess herself nonplussed; for, though
  capable of growing hysterical, she was incapable of propounding any
  rational theory. Consequently she felt the more that she needed tender
  comfort and advice.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then THIS is what I think about the dead souls,&rdquo; said the hostess.
  Instantly the guest pricked up her ears (or, rather, they pricked
  themselves up) and straightened herself and became, somehow, more modish,
  and, despite her not inconsiderable weight, posed herself to look like a
  piece of thistledown floating on the breeze.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The dead souls,&rdquo; began the hostess.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Are what, are what?&rdquo; inquired the guest in great excitement.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Are, are&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Tell me, tell me, for heaven&rsquo;s sake!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;They are an invention to conceal something else. The man&rsquo;s real object
  is, is&mdash;TO ABDUCT THE GOVERNOR&rsquo;S DAUGHTER.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  So startling and unexpected was this conclusion that the guest sat reduced
  to a state of pale, petrified, genuine amazement.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;My God!&rdquo; she cried, clapping her hands, &ldquo;I should NEVER have guessed it!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, to tell you the truth, I guessed it as soon as ever you opened your
  mouth.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;So much, then, for educating girls like the Governor&rsquo;s daughter at
  school! Just see what comes of it!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, indeed! And they tell me that she says things which I hesitate even
  to repeat.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Truly it wrings one&rsquo;s heart to see to what lengths immorality has come.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Some of the men have quite lost their heads about her, but for my part I
  think her not worth noticing.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Of course. And her manners are unbearable. But what puzzles me most is
  how a travelled man like Chichikov could come to let himself in for such
  an affair. Surely he must have accomplices?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes; and I should say that one of those accomplices is Nozdrev.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Surely not?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;CERTAINLY I should say so. Why, I have known him even try to sell his own
  father! At all events he staked him at cards.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Indeed! You interest me. I should never had thought him capable of such
  things.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I always guessed him to be so.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The two ladies were still discussing the matter with acumen and success
  when there walked into the room the Public Prosecutor&mdash;bushy
  eyebrows, motionless features, blinking eyes, and all. At once the ladies
  hastened to inform him of the events related, adducing therewith full
  details both as to the purchase of dead souls and as to the scheme to
  abduct the Governor&rsquo;s daughter; after which they departed in different
  directions, for the purpose of raising the rest of the town. For the
  execution of this undertaking not more than half an hour was required. So
  thoroughly did they succeed in throwing dust in the public&rsquo;s eyes that for
  a while every one&mdash;more especially the army of public officials&mdash;was
  placed in the position of a schoolboy who, while still asleep, has had a
  bag of pepper thrown in his face by a party of more early-rising comrades.
  The questions now to be debated resolved themselves into two&mdash;namely,
  the question of the dead souls and the question of the Governor&rsquo;s
  daughter. To this end two parties were formed&mdash;the men&rsquo;s party and
  the feminine section. The men&rsquo;s party&mdash;the more absolutely senseless
  of the two&mdash;devoted its attention to the dead souls: the women&rsquo;s
  party occupied itself exclusively with the alleged abduction of the
  Governor&rsquo;s daughter. And here it may be said (to the ladies&rsquo; credit) that
  the women&rsquo;s party displayed far more method and caution than did its rival
  faction, probably because the function in life of its members had always
  been that of managing and administering a household. With the ladies,
  therefore, matters soon assumed vivid and definite shape; they became
  clearly and irrefutably materialised; they stood stripped of all doubt and
  other impedimenta. Said some of the ladies in question, Chichikov had long
  been in love with the maiden, and the pair had kept tryst by the light of
  the moon, while the Governor would have given his consent (seeing that
  Chichikov was as rich as a Jew) but for the obstacle that Chichikov had
  deserted a wife already (how the worthy dames came to know that he was
  married remains a mystery), and the said deserted wife, pining with love
  for her faithless husband, had sent the Governor a letter of the most
  touching kind, so that Chichikov, on perceiving that the father and mother
  would never give their consent, had decided to abduct the girl. In other
  circles the matter was stated in a different way. That is to say, this
  section averred that Chichikov did NOT possess a wife, but that, as a man
  of subtlety and experience, he had bethought him of obtaining the
  daughter&rsquo;s hand through the expedient of first tackling the mother and
  carrying on with her an ardent liaison, and that, thereafter, he had made
  an application for the desired hand, but that the mother, fearing to
  commit a sin against religion, and feeling in her heart certain gnawings
  of conscience, had returned a blank refusal to Chichikov&rsquo;s request;
  whereupon Chichikov had decided to carry out the abduction alleged. To the
  foregoing, of course, there became appended various additional proofs and
  items of evidence, in proportion as the sensation spread to more remote
  corners of the town. At length, with these perfectings, the affair reached
  the ears of the Governor&rsquo;s wife herself. Naturally, as the mother of a
  family, and as the first lady in the town, and as a matron who had never
  before been suspected of things of the kind, she was highly offended when
  she heard the stories, and very justly so: with the result that her poor
  young daughter, though innocent, had to endure about as unpleasant a
  tete-a-tete as ever befell a maiden of sixteen, while, for his part, the
  Swiss footman received orders never at any time to admit Chichikov to the
  house.
</p>
<p>
  Having done their business with the Governor&rsquo;s wife, the ladies&rsquo; party
  descended upon the male section, with a view to influencing it to their
  own side by asserting that the dead souls were an invention used solely
  for the purpose of diverting suspicion and successfully affecting the
  abduction. And, indeed, more than one man was converted, and joined the
  feminine camp, in spite of the fact that thereby such seceders incurred
  strong names from their late comrades&mdash;names such as &ldquo;old women,&rdquo;
   &ldquo;petticoats,&rdquo; and others of a nature peculiarly offensive to the male sex.
</p>
<p>
  Also, however much they might arm themselves and take the field, the men
  could not compass such orderliness within their ranks as could the women.
  With the former everything was of the antiquated and rough-hewn and
  ill-fitting and unsuitable and badly-adapted and inferior kind; their
  heads were full of nothing but discord and triviality and confusion and
  slovenliness of thought. In brief, they displayed everywhere the male
  bent, the rude, ponderous nature which is incapable either of managing a
  household or of jumping to a conclusion, as well as remains always
  distrustful and lazy and full of constant doubt and everlasting timidity.
  For instance, the men&rsquo;s party declared that the whole story was rubbish&mdash;that
  the alleged abduction of the Governor&rsquo;s daughter was the work rather of a
  military than of a civilian culprit; that the ladies were lying when they
  accused Chichikov of the deed; that a woman was like a money-bag&mdash;whatsoever
  you put into her she thenceforth retained; that the subject which really
  demanded attention was the dead souls, of which the devil only knew the
  meaning, but in which there certainly lurked something that was contrary
  to good order and discipline. One reason why the men&rsquo;s party was so
  certain that the dead souls connoted something contrary to good order and
  discipline, was that there had just been appointed to the province a new
  Governor-General&mdash;an event which, of course, had thrown the whole
  army of provincial tchinovniks into a state of great excitement, seeing
  that they knew that before long there would ensue transferments and
  sentences of censure, as well as the series of official dinners with which
  a Governor-General is accustomed to entertain his subordinates. &ldquo;Alas,&rdquo;
   thought the army of tchinovniks, &ldquo;it is probable that, should he learn of
  the gross reports at present afloat in our town, he will make such a fuss
  that we shall never hear the last of them.&rdquo; In particular did the Director
  of the Medical Department turn pale at the thought that possibly the new
  Governor-General would surmise the term &ldquo;dead folk&rdquo; to connote patients in
  the local hospitals who, for want of proper preventative measures, had
  died of sporadic fever. Indeed, might it not be that Chichikov was neither
  more nor less than an emissary of the said Governor-General, sent to
  conduct a secret inquiry? Accordingly he (the Director of the Medical
  Department) communicated this last supposition to the President of the
  Council, who, though at first inclined to ejaculate &ldquo;Rubbish!&rdquo; suddenly
  turned pale on propounding to himself the theory. &ldquo;What if the souls
  purchased by Chichikov should REALLY be dead ones?&rdquo;&mdash;a terrible
  thought considering that he, the President, had permitted their
  transferment to be registered, and had himself acted as Plushkin&rsquo;s
  representative! What if these things should reach the Governor-General&rsquo;s
  ears? He mentioned the matter to one friend and another, and they, in
  their turn, went white to the lips, for panic spreads faster and is even
  more destructive, than the dreaded black death. Also, to add to the
  tchinovniks&rsquo; troubles, it so befell that just at this juncture there came
  into the local Governor&rsquo;s hands two documents of great importance. The
  first of them contained advices that, according to received evidence and
  reports, there was operating in the province a forger of rouble-notes who
  had been passing under various aliases and must therefore be sought for
  with the utmost diligence; while the second document was a letter from the
  Governor of a neighbouring province with regard to a malefactor who had
  there evaded apprehension&mdash;a letter conveying also a warning that, if
  in the province of the town of N. there should appear any suspicious
  individual who could produce neither references nor passports, he was to
  be arrested forthwith. These two documents left every one thunderstruck,
  for they knocked on the head all previous conceptions and theories. Not
  for a moment could it be supposed that the former document referred to
  Chichikov; yet, as each man pondered the position from his own point of
  view, he remembered that no one REALLY knew who Chichikov was; as also
  that his vague references to himself had&mdash;yes!&mdash;included
  statements that his career in the service had suffered much to the cause
  of Truth, and that he possessed a number of enemies who were seeking his
  life. This gave the tchinovniks further food for thought. Perhaps his life
  really DID stand in danger? Perhaps he really WAS being sought for by some
  one? Perhaps he really HAD done something of the kind above referred to?
  As a matter of fact, who was he?&mdash;not that it could actually be
  supposed that he was a forger of notes, still less a brigand, seeing that
  his exterior was respectable in the highest degree. Yet who was he? At
  length the tchinovniks decided to make enquiries among those of whom he
  had purchased souls, in order that at least it might be learnt what the
  purchases had consisted of, and what exactly underlay them, and whether,
  in passing, he had explained to any one his real intentions, or revealed
  to any one his identity. In the first instance, therefore, resort was had
  to Korobotchka. Yet little was gleaned from that source&mdash;merely a
  statement that he had bought of her some souls for fifteen roubles apiece,
  and also a quantity of feathers, while promising also to buy some other
  commodities in the future, seeing that, in particular, he had entered into
  a contract with the Treasury for lard, a fact constituting fairly
  presumptive proof that the man was a rogue, seeing that just such another
  fellow had bought a quantity of feathers, yet had cheated folk all round,
  and, in particular, had done the Archpriest out of over a hundred roubles.
  Thus the net result of Madame&rsquo;s cross-examination was to convince the
  tchinovniks that she was a garrulous, silly old woman. With regard to
  Manilov, he replied that he would answer for Chichikov as he would for
  himself, and that he would gladly sacrifice his property in toto if
  thereby he could attain even a tithe of the qualities which Paul
  Ivanovitch possessed. Finally, he delivered on Chichikov, with
  acutely-knitted brows, a eulogy couched in the most charming of terms, and
  coupled with sundry sentiments on the subject of friendship and affection
  in general. True, these remarks sufficed to indicate the tender impulses
  of the speaker&rsquo;s heart, but also they did nothing to enlighten his
  examiners concerning the business that was actually at hand. As for
  Sobakevitch, that landowner replied that he considered Chichikov an
  excellent fellow, as well as that the souls whom he had sold to his
  visitor had been in the truest sense of the word alive, but that he could
  not answer for anything which might occur in the future, seeing that any
  difficulties which might arise in the course of the actual transferment of
  souls would not be HIS fault, in view of the fact that God was lord of
  all, and that fevers and other mortal complaints were so numerous in the
  world, and that instances of whole villages perishing through the same
  could be found on record.
</p>
<p>
  Finally, our friends the tchinovniks found themselves compelled to resort
  to an expedient which, though not particularly savoury, is not
  infrequently employed&mdash;namely, the expedient of getting lacqueys
  quietly to approach the servants of the person concerning whom information
  is desired, and to ascertain from them (the servants) certain details with
  regard to their master&rsquo;s life and antecedents. Yet even from this source
  very little was obtained, since Petrushka provided his interrogators
  merely with a taste of the smell of his living-room, and Selifan confined
  his replies to a statement that the barin had &ldquo;been in the employment of
  the State, and also had served in the Customs.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  In short, the sum total of the results gathered by the tchinovniks was
  that they still stood in ignorance of Chichikov&rsquo;s identity, but that he
  MUST be some one; wherefore it was decided to hold a final debate on the
  subject on what ought to be done, and who Chichikov could possibly be, and
  whether or not he was a man who ought to be apprehended and detained as
  not respectable, or whether he was a man who might himself be able to
  apprehend and detain THEM as persons lacking in respectability. The debate
  in question, it was proposed, should be held at the residence of the Chief
  of Police, who is known to our readers as the father and the general
  benefactor of the town.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0010" id="link2HCH0010">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
