<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>
  CHAPTER IV
</h2>
<p>
  On reaching the tavern, Chichikov called a halt. His reasons for this were
  twofold&mdash;namely, that he wanted to rest the horses, and that he
  himself desired some refreshment. In this connection the author feels
  bound to confess that the appetite and the capacity of such men are
  greatly to be envied. Of those well-to-do folk of St. Petersburg and
  Moscow who spend their time in considering what they shall eat on the
  morrow, and in composing a dinner for the day following, and who never sit
  down to a meal without first of all injecting a pill and then swallowing
  oysters and crabs and a quantity of other monsters, while eternally
  departing for Karlsbad or the Caucasus, the author has but a small
  opinion. Yes, THEY are not the persons to inspire envy. Rather, it is the
  folk of the middle classes&mdash;folk who at one posthouse call for bacon,
  and at another for a sucking pig, and at a third for a steak of sturgeon
  or a baked pudding with onions, and who can sit down to table at any hour,
  as though they had never had a meal in their lives, and can devour fish of
  all sorts, and guzzle and chew it with a view to provoking further
  appetite&mdash;these, I say, are the folk who enjoy heaven&rsquo;s most favoured
  gift. To attain such a celestial condition the great folk of whom I have
  spoken would sacrifice half their serfs and half their mortgaged and
  non-mortgaged property, with the foreign and domestic improvements
  thereon, if thereby they could compass such a stomach as is possessed by
  the folk of the middle class. But, unfortunately, neither money nor real
  estate, whether improved or non-improved, can purchase such a stomach.
</p>
<p>
  The little wooden tavern, with its narrow, but hospitable, curtain
  suspended from a pair of rough-hewn doorposts like old church
  candlesticks, seemed to invite Chichikov to enter. True, the establishment
  was only a Russian hut of the ordinary type, but it was a hut of larger
  dimensions than usual, and had around its windows and gables carved and
  patterned cornices of bright-coloured wood which threw into relief the
  darker hue of the walls, and consorted well with the flowered pitchers
  painted on the shutters.
</p>
<p>
  Ascending the narrow wooden staircase to the upper floor, and arriving
  upon a broad landing, Chichikov found himself confronted with a creaking
  door and a stout old woman in a striped print gown. &ldquo;This way, if you
  please,&rdquo; she said. Within the apartment designated Chichikov encountered
  the old friends which one invariably finds in such roadside hostelries&mdash;to
  wit, a heavy samovar, four smooth, bescratched walls of white pine, a
  three-cornered press with cups and teapots, egg-cups of gilded china
  standing in front of ikons suspended by blue and red ribands, a cat lately
  delivered of a family, a mirror which gives one four eyes instead of two
  and a pancake for a face, and, beside the ikons, some bunches of herbs and
  carnations of such faded dustiness that, should one attempt to smell them,
  one is bound to burst out sneezing.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Have you a sucking-pig?&rdquo; Chichikov inquired of the landlady as she stood
  expectantly before him.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And some horse-radish and sour cream?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then serve them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The landlady departed for the purpose, and returned with a plate, a napkin
  (the latter starched to the consistency of dried bark), a knife with a
  bone handle beginning to turn yellow, a two-pronged fork as thin as a
  wafer, and a salt-cellar incapable of being made to stand upright.
</p>
<p>
  Following the accepted custom, our hero entered into conversation with the
  woman, and inquired whether she herself or a landlord kept the tavern; how
  much income the tavern brought in; whether her sons lived with her;
  whether the oldest was a bachelor or married; whom the eldest had taken to
  wife; whether the dowry had been large; whether the father-in-law had been
  satisfied, and whether the said father-in-law had not complained of
  receiving too small a present at the wedding. In short, Chichikov touched
  on every conceivable point. Likewise (of course) he displayed some
  curiosity as to the landowners of the neighbourhood. Their names, he
  ascertained, were Blochin, Potchitaev, Minoi, Cheprakov, and Sobakevitch.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you are acquainted with Sobakevitch?&rdquo; he said; whereupon the old
  woman informed him that she knew not only Sobakevitch, but also Manilov,
  and that the latter was the more delicate eater of the two, since, whereas
  Manilov always ordered a roast fowl and some veal and mutton, and then
  tasted merely a morsel of each, Sobakevitch would order one dish only, but
  consume the whole of it, and then demand more at the same price.
</p>
<p>
  Whilst Chichikov was thus conversing and partaking of the sucking pig
  until only a fragment of it seemed likely to remain, the sound of an
  approaching vehicle made itself heard. Peering through the window, he saw
  draw up to the tavern door a light britchka drawn by three fine horses.
  From it there descended two men&mdash;one flaxen-haired and tall, and the
  other dark-haired and of slighter build. While the flaxen-haired man was
  clad in a dark-blue coat, the other one was wrapped in a coat of striped
  pattern. Behind the britchka stood a second, but an empty, turn-out, drawn
  by four long-coated steeds in ragged collars and rope harnesses. The
  flaxen-haired man lost no time in ascending the staircase, while his
  darker friend remained below to fumble at something in the britchka,
  talking, as he did so, to the driver of the vehicle which stood hitched
  behind. Somehow, the dark-haired man&rsquo;s voice struck Chichikov as familiar;
  and as he was taking another look at him the flaxen-haired gentleman
  entered the room. The newcomer was a man of lofty stature, with a small
  red moustache and a lean, hard-bitten face whose redness made it evident
  that its acquaintance, if not with the smoke of gunpowder, at all events
  with that of tobacco, was intimate and extensive. Nevertheless he greeted
  Chichikov civilly, and the latter returned his bow. Indeed, the pair would
  have entered into conversation, and have made one another&rsquo;s acquaintance
  (since a beginning was made with their simultaneously expressing
  satisfaction at the circumstance that the previous night&rsquo;s rain had laid
  the dust on the roads, and thereby made driving cool and pleasant) when
  the gentleman&rsquo;s darker-favoured friend also entered the room, and,
  throwing his cap upon the table, pushed back a mass of dishevelled black
  locks from his brow. The latest arrival was a man of medium height, but
  well put together, and possessed of a pair of full red cheeks, a set of
  teeth as white as snow, and coal-black whiskers. Indeed, so fresh was his
  complexion that it seemed to have been compounded of blood and milk, while
  health danced in his every feature.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ha, ha, ha!&rdquo; he cried with a gesture of astonishment at the sight of
  Chichikov. &ldquo;What chance brings YOU here?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Upon that Chichikov recognised Nozdrev&mdash;the man whom he had met at
  dinner at the Public Prosecutor&rsquo;s, and who, within a minute or two of the
  introduction, had become so intimate with his fellow guest as to address
  him in the second person singular, in spite of the fact that Chichikov had
  given him no opportunity for doing so.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Where have you been to-day?&rdquo; Nozdrev inquired, and, without waiting for
  an answer, went on: &ldquo;For myself, I am just from the fair, and completely
  cleaned out. Actually, I have had to do the journey back with stage
  horses! Look out of the window, and see them for yourself.&rdquo; And he turned
  Chichikov&rsquo;s head so sharply in the desired direction that he came very
  near to bumping it against the window frame. &ldquo;Did you ever see such a bag
  of tricks? The cursed things have only just managed to get here. In fact,
  on the way I had to transfer myself to this fellow&rsquo;s britchka.&rdquo; He
  indicated his companion with a finger. &ldquo;By the way, don&rsquo;t you know one
  another? He is Mizhuev, my brother-in-law. He and I were talking of you
  only this morning. &lsquo;Just you see,&rsquo; said I to him, &lsquo;if we do not fall in
  with Chichikov before we have done.&rsquo; Heavens, how completely cleaned out I
  am! Not only have I lost four good horses, but also my watch and chain.&rdquo;
   Chichikov perceived that in very truth his interlocutor was minus the
  articles named, as well as that one of Nozdrev&rsquo;s whiskers was less bushy
  in appearance than the other one. &ldquo;Had I had another twenty roubles in my
  pocket,&rdquo; went on Nozdrev, &ldquo;I should have won back all that I have lost, as
  well as have pouched a further thirty thousand. Yes, I give you my word of
  honour on that.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But you were saying the same thing when last I met you,&rdquo; put in the
  flaxen-haired man. &ldquo;Yet, even though I lent you fifty roubles, you lost
  them all.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I should not have lost them THIS time. Don&rsquo;t try to make me out a
  fool. I should NOT have lost them, I tell you. Had I only played the right
  card, I should have broken the bank.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But you did NOT break the bank,&rdquo; remarked the flaxen-haired man.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No. That was because I did not play my cards right. But what about your
  precious major&rsquo;s play? Is THAT good?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good or not, at least he beat you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Splendid of him! Nevertheless I will get my own back. Let him play me at
  doubles, and we shall soon see what sort of a player he is! Friend
  Chichikov, at first we had a glorious time, for the fair was a tremendous
  success. Indeed, the tradesmen said that never yet had there been such a
  gathering. I myself managed to sell everything from my estate at a good
  price. In fact, we had a magnificent time. I can&rsquo;t help thinking of it,
  devil take me! But what a pity YOU were not there! Three versts from the
  town there is quartered a regiment of dragoons, and you would scarcely
  believe what a lot of officers it has. Forty at least there are, and they
  do a fine lot of knocking about the town and drinking. In particular,
  Staff-Captain Potsieluev is a SPLENDID fellow! You should just see his
  moustache! Why, he calls good claret &lsquo;trash&rsquo;! &lsquo;Bring me some of the usual
  trash,&rsquo; is his way of ordering it. And Lieutenant Kuvshinnikov, too! He is
  as delightful as the other man. In fact, I may say that every one of the
  lot is a rake. I spent my whole time with them, and you can imagine that
  Ponomarev, the wine merchant, did a fine trade indeed! All the same, he is
  a rascal, you know, and ought not to be dealt with, for he puts all sorts
  of rubbish into his liquor&mdash;Indian wood and burnt cork and elderberry
  juice, the villain! Nevertheless, get him to produce a bottle from what he
  calls his &lsquo;special cellar,&rsquo; and you will fancy yourself in the seventh
  heaven of delight. And what quantities of champagne we drank! Compared
  with it, provincial stuff is kvass <a href="#linknote-18"
   name="linknoteref-18" id="linknoteref-18"><small>18</small></a>. Try to
  imagine not merely Clicquot, but a sort of blend of Clicquot and Matradura&mdash;Clicquot
  of double strength. Also Ponomarev produced a bottle of French stuff which
  he calls &lsquo;Bonbon.&rsquo; Had it a bouquet, ask you? Why, it had the bouquet of a
  rose garden, of anything else you like. What times we had, to be sure!
  Just after we had left Pnomarev&rsquo;s place, some prince or another arrived in
  the town, and sent out for some champagne; but not a bottle was there
  left, for the officers had drunk every one! Why, I myself got through
  seventeen bottles at a sitting.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Come, come! You CAN&rsquo;T have got through seventeen,&rdquo; remarked the
  flaxen-haired man.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I did, I give my word of honour,&rdquo; retorted Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Imagine what you like, but you didn&rsquo;t drink even TEN bottles at a
  sitting.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Will you bet that I did not?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No; for what would be the use of betting about it?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then at least wager the gun which you have bought.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, I am not going to do anything of the kind.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Just as an experiment?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It is as well for you that you don&rsquo;t, since, otherwise, you would have
  found yourself minus both gun and cap. However, friend Chichikov, it is a
  pity you were not there. Had you been there, I feel sure you would have
  found yourself unable to part with Lieutenant Kuvshinnikov. You and he
  would have hit it off splendidly. You know, he is quite a different sort
  from the Public Prosecutor and our other provincial skinflints&mdash;fellows
  who shiver in their shoes before they will spend a single kopeck. HE will
  play faro, or anything else, and at any time. Why did you not come with
  us, instead of wasting your time on cattle breeding or something of the
  sort? But never mind. Embrace me. I like you immensely. Mizhuev, see how
  curiously things have turned out. Chichikov has nothing to do with me, or
  I with him, yet here is he come from God knows where, and landed in the
  very spot where I happen to be living! I may tell you that, no matter how
  many carriages I possessed, I should gamble the lot away. Recently I went
  in for a turn at billiards, and lost two jars of pomade, a china teapot,
  and a guitar. Then I staked some more things, and, like a fool, lost them
  all, and six roubles in addition. What a dog is that Kuvshinnikov! He and
  I attended nearly every ball in the place. In particular, there was a
  woman&mdash;decolletee, and such a swell! I merely thought to myself, &lsquo;The
  devil take her!&rsquo; but Kuvshinnikov is such a wag that he sat down beside
  her, and began paying her strings of compliments in French. However, I did
  not neglect the damsels altogether&mdash;although HE calls that sort of
  thing &lsquo;going in for strawberries.&rsquo; By the way, I have a splendid piece of
  fish and some caviare with me. &lsquo;Tis all I HAVE brought back! In fact it is
  a lucky chance that I happened to buy the stuff before my money was gone.
  Where are you for?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am about to call on a friend.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;On what friend? Let him go to the devil, and come to my place instead.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I cannot, I cannot. I have business to do.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, business again! I thought so!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I HAVE business to do&mdash;and pressing business at that.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I wager that you&rsquo;re lying. If not, tell me whom you&rsquo;re going to call
  upon.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Upon Sobakevitch.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Instantly Nozdrev burst into a laugh compassable only by a healthy man in
  whose head every tooth still remains as white as sugar. By this I mean the
  laugh of quivering cheeks, the laugh which causes a neighbour who is
  sleeping behind double doors three rooms away to leap from his bed and
  exclaim with distended eyes, &ldquo;Hullo! Something HAS upset him!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What is there to laugh at?&rdquo; asked Chichikov, a trifle nettled; but
  Nozdrev laughed more unrestrainedly than ever, ejaculating: &ldquo;Oh, spare us
  all! The thing is so amusing that I shall die of it!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I say that there is nothing to laugh at,&rdquo; repeated Chichikov. &ldquo;It is in
  fulfilment of a promise that I am on my way to Sobakevitch&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you will scarcely be glad to be alive when you&rsquo;ve got there, for he
  is the veriest miser in the countryside. Oh, <i>I</i> know you. However,
  if you think to find there either faro or a bottle of &lsquo;Bonbon&rsquo; you are
  mistaken. Look here, my good friend. Let Sobakevitch go to the devil, and
  come to MY place, where at least I shall have a piece of sturgeon to offer
  you for dinner. Ponomarev said to me on parting: &lsquo;This piece is just the
  thing for you. Even if you were to search the whole market, you would
  never find a better one.&rsquo; But of course he is a terrible rogue. I said to
  him outright: &lsquo;You and the Collector of Taxes are the two greatest
  skinflints in the town.&rsquo; But he only stroked his beard and smiled. Every
  day I used to breakfast with Kuvshinnikov in his restaurant. Well, what I
  was nearly forgetting is this: that, though I am aware that you can&rsquo;t
  forgo your engagement, I am not going to give you up&mdash;no, not for ten
  thousand roubles of money. I tell you that in advance.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Here he broke off to run to the window and shout to his servant (who was
  holding a knife in one hand and a crust of bread and a piece of sturgeon
  in the other&mdash;he had contrived to filch the latter while fumbling in
  the britchka for something else):
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hi, Porphyri! Bring here that puppy, you rascal! What a puppy it is!
  Unfortunately that thief of a landlord has given it nothing to eat, even
  though I have promised him the roan filly which, as you may remember, I
  swopped from Khvostirev.&rdquo; As a matter of act, Chichikov had never in his
  life seen either Khvostirev or the roan filly.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Barin, do you wish for anything to eat?&rdquo; inquired the landlady as she
  entered.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, nothing at all. Ah, friend Chichikov, what times we had! Yes, give me
  a glass of vodka, old woman. What sort do you keep?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Aniseed.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then bring me a glass of it,&rdquo; repeated Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And one for me as well,&rdquo; added the flaxen-haired man.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;At the theatre,&rdquo; went on Nozdrev, &ldquo;there was an actress who sang like a
  canary. Kuvshinnikov, who happened to be sitting with me, said: &lsquo;My boy,
  you had better go and gather that strawberry.&rsquo; As for the booths at the
  fair, they numbered, I should say, fifty.&rdquo; At this point he broke off to
  take the glass of vodka from the landlady, who bowed low in
  acknowledgement of his doing so. At the same moment Porphyri&mdash;a
  fellow dressed like his master (that is to say, in a greasy, wadded
  overcoat)&mdash;entered with the puppy.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Put the brute down here,&rdquo; commanded Nozdrev, &ldquo;and then fasten it up.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Porphyri deposited the animal upon the floor; whereupon it proceeded to
  act after the manner of dogs.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;THERE&rsquo;S a puppy for you!&rdquo; cried Nozdrev, catching hold of it by the back,
  and lifting it up. The puppy uttered a piteous yelp.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I can see that you haven&rsquo;t done what I told you to do,&rdquo; he continued to
  Porphyri after an inspection of the animal&rsquo;s belly. &ldquo;You have quite
  forgotten to brush him.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I DID brush him,&rdquo; protested Porphyri.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then where did these fleas come from?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I cannot think. Perhaps they have leapt into his coat out of the
  britchka.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You liar! As a matter of fact, you have forgotten to brush him.
  Nevertheless, look at these ears, Chichikov. Just feel them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why should I? Without doing that, I can see that he is well-bred.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nevertheless, catch hold of his ears and feel them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  To humour the fellow Chichikov did as he had requested, remarking: &ldquo;Yes,
  he seems likely to turn out well.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And feel the coldness of his nose! Just take it in your hand.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Not wishing to offend his interlocutor, Chichikov felt the puppy&rsquo;s nose,
  saying: &ldquo;Some day he will have an excellent scent.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, will he not? &lsquo;Tis the right sort of muzzle for that. I must say that
  I have long been wanting such a puppy. Porphyri, take him away again.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Porphyri lifted up the puppy, and bore it downstairs.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Look here, Chichikov,&rdquo; resumed Nozdrev. &ldquo;You MUST come to my place. It
  lies only five versts away, and we can go there like the wind, and you can
  visit Sobakevitch afterwards.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Shall I, or shall I not, go to Nozdrev&rsquo;s?&rdquo; reflected Chichikov. &ldquo;Is he
  likely to prove any more useful than the rest? Well, at least he is as
  promising, even though he has lost so much at play. But he has a head on
  his shoulders, and therefore I must go carefully if I am to tackle him
  concerning my scheme.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  With that he added aloud: &ldquo;Very well, I WILL come with you, but do not let
  us be long, for my time is very precious.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That&rsquo;s right, that&rsquo;s right!&rdquo; cried Nozdrev. &ldquo;Splendid, splendid! Let me
  embrace you!&rdquo; And he fell upon Chichikov&rsquo;s neck. &ldquo;All three of us will
  go.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no,&rdquo; put in the flaxen-haired man. &ldquo;You must excuse me, for I must be
  off home.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Rubbish, rubbish! I am NOT going to excuse you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But my wife will be furious with me. You and Monsieur Chichikov must
  change into the other britchka.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Come, come! The thing is not to be thought of.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The flaxen-haired man was one of those people in whose character, at first
  sight, there seems to lurk a certain grain of stubbornness&mdash;so much
  so that, almost before one has begun to speak, they are ready to dispute
  one&rsquo;s words, and to disagree with anything that may be opposed to their
  peculiar form of opinion. For instance, they will decline to have folly
  called wisdom, or any tune danced to but their own. Always, however, will
  there become manifest in their character a soft spot, and in the end they
  will accept what hitherto they have denied, and call what is foolish
  sensible, and even dance&mdash;yes, better than any one else will do&mdash;to
  a tune set by some one else. In short, they generally begin well, but
  always end badly.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Rubbish!&rdquo; said Nozdrev in answer to a further objection on his
  brother-in-law&rsquo;s part. And, sure enough, no sooner had Nozdrev clapped his
  cap upon his head than the flaxen-haired man started to follow him and his
  companion.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But the gentleman has not paid for the vodka?&rdquo; put in the old woman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;All right, all right, good mother. Look here, brother-in-law. Pay her,
  will you, for I have not a kopeck left.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How much?&rdquo; inquired the brother-in-law.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What, sir? Eighty kopecks, if you please,&rdquo; replied the old woman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A lie! Give her half a rouble. That will be quite enough.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, it will NOT, barin,&rdquo; protested the old woman. However, she took the
  money gratefully, and even ran to the door to open it for the gentlemen.
  As a matter of fact, she had lost nothing by the transaction, since she
  had demanded fully a quarter more than the vodka was worth.
</p>
<p>
  The travellers then took their seats, and since Chichikov&rsquo;s britchka kept
  alongside the britchka wherein Nozdrev and his brother-in-law were seated,
  it was possible for all three men to converse together as they proceeded.
  Behind them came Nozdrev&rsquo;s smaller buggy, with its team of lean stage
  horses and Porphyri and the puppy. But inasmuch as the conversation which
  the travellers maintained was not of a kind likely to interest the reader,
  I might do worse than say something concerning Nozdrev himself, seeing
  that he is destined to play no small role in our story.
</p>
<p>
  Nozdrev&rsquo;s face will be familiar to the reader, seeing that every one must
  have encountered many such. Fellows of the kind are known as &ldquo;gay young
  sparks,&rdquo; and, even in their boyhood and school days, earn a reputation for
  being bons camarades (though with it all they come in for some hard
  knocks) for the reason that their faces evince an element of frankness,
  directness, and enterprise which enables them soon to make friends, and,
  almost before you have had time to look around, to start addressing you in
  the second person singular. Yet, while cementing such friendships for all
  eternity, almost always they begin quarrelling the same evening, since,
  throughout, they are a loquacious, dissipated, high-spirited, over-showy
  tribe. Indeed, at thirty-five Nozdrev was just what he had been an
  eighteen and twenty&mdash;he was just such a lover of fast living. Nor had
  his marriage in any way changed him, and the less so since his wife had
  soon departed to another world, and left behind her two children, whom he
  did not want, and who were therefore placed in the charge of a
  good-looking nursemaid. Never at any time could he remain at home for more
  than a single day, for his keen scent could range over scores and scores
  of versts, and detect any fair which promised balls and crowds.
  Consequently in a trice he would be there&mdash;quarrelling, and creating
  disturbances over the gaming-table (like all men of his type, he had a
  perfect passion for cards) yet playing neither a faultless nor an
  over-clean game, since he was both a blunderer and able to indulge in a
  large number of illicit cuts and other devices. The result was that the
  game often ended in another kind of sport altogether. That is to say,
  either he received a good kicking, or he had his thick and very handsome
  whiskers pulled; with the result that on certain occasions he returned
  home with one of those appendages looking decidedly ragged. Yet his plump,
  healthy-looking cheeks were so robustly constituted, and contained such an
  abundance of recreative vigour, that a new whisker soon sprouted in place
  of the old one, and even surpassed its predecessor. Again (and the
  following is a phenomenon peculiar to Russia) a very short time would have
  elapsed before once more he would be consorting with the very cronies who
  had recently cuffed him&mdash;and consorting with them as though nothing
  whatsoever had happened&mdash;no reference to the subject being made by
  him, and they too holding their tongues.
</p>
<p>
  In short, Nozdrev was, as it were, a man of incident. Never was he present
  at any gathering without some sort of a fracas occurring thereat. Either
  he would require to be expelled from the room by gendarmes, or his friends
  would have to kick him out into the street. At all events, should neither
  of those occurrences take place, at least he did something of a nature
  which would not otherwise have been witnessed. That is to say, should he
  not play the fool in a buffet to such an extent as to make every one smile,
  you may be sure that he was engaged in lying to a degree which at times
  abashed even himself. Moreover, the man lied without reason. For instance,
  he would begin telling a story to the effect that he possessed a
  blue-coated or a red-coated horse; until, in the end, his listeners would
  be forced to leave him with the remark, &ldquo;You are giving us some fine
  stuff, old fellow!&rdquo; Also, men like Nozdrev have a passion for insulting
  their neighbours without the least excuse afforded. (For that matter, even
  a man of good standing and of respectable exterior&mdash;a man with a star
  on his breast&mdash;may unexpectedly press your hand one day, and begin
  talking to you on subjects of a nature to give food for serious thought.
  Yet just as unexpectedly may that man start abusing you to your face&mdash;and
  do so in a manner worthy of a collegiate registrar rather than of a man
  who wears a star on his breast and aspires to converse on subjects which
  merit reflection. All that one can do in such a case is to stand shrugging
  one&rsquo;s shoulders in amazement.) Well, Nozdrev had just such a weakness. The
  more he became friendly with a man, the sooner would he insult him, and be
  ready to spread calumnies as to his reputation. Yet all the while he would
  consider himself the insulted one&rsquo;s friend, and, should he meet him again,
  would greet him in the most amicable style possible, and say, &ldquo;You rascal,
  why have you given up coming to see me.&rdquo; Thus, taken all round, Nozdrev
  was a person of many aspects and numerous potentialities. In one and the
  same breath would he propose to go with you whithersoever you might choose
  (even to the very ends of the world should you so require) or to enter
  upon any sort of an enterprise with you, or to exchange any commodity for
  any other commodity which you might care to name. Guns, horses, dogs, all
  were subjects for barter&mdash;though not for profit so far as YOU were
  concerned. Such traits are mostly the outcome of a boisterous temperament,
  as is additionally exemplified by the fact that if at a fair he chanced to
  fall in with a simpleton and to fleece him, he would then proceed to buy a
  quantity of the very first articles which came to hand&mdash;horse-collars,
  cigar-lighters, dresses for his nursemaid, foals, raisins, silver ewers,
  lengths of holland, wheatmeal, tobacco, revolvers, dried herrings,
  pictures, whetstones, crockery, boots, and so forth, until every atom of
  his money was exhausted. Yet seldom were these articles conveyed home,
  since, as a rule, the same day saw them lost to some more skilful gambler,
  in addition to his pipe, his tobacco-pouch, his mouthpiece, his
  four-horsed turn-out, and his coachman: with the result that, stripped to
  his very shirt, he would be forced to beg the loan of a vehicle from a
  friend.
</p>
<p>
  Such was Nozdrev. Some may say that characters of his type have become
  extinct, that Nozdrevs no longer exist. Alas! such as say this will be
  wrong; for many a day must pass before the Nozdrevs will have disappeared
  from our ken. Everywhere they are to be seen in our midst&mdash;the only
  difference between the new and the old being a difference of garments.
  Persons of superficial observation are apt to consider that a man clad in
  a different coat is quite a different person from what he used to be.
</p>
<p>
  To continue. The three vehicles bowled up to the steps of Nozdrev&rsquo;s house,
  and their occupants alighted. But no preparations whatsoever had been made
  for the guest&rsquo;s reception, for on some wooden trestles in the centre of
  the dining-room a couple of peasants were engaged in whitewashing the
  ceiling and drawling out an endless song as they splashed their stuff
  about the floor. Hastily bidding peasants and trestles to be gone, Nozdrev
  departed to another room with further instructions. Indeed, so audible was
  the sound of his voice as he ordered dinner that Chichikov&mdash;who was
  beginning to feel hungry once more&mdash;was enabled to gather that it
  would be at least five o&rsquo;clock before a meal of any kind would be
  available. On his return, Nozdrev invited his companions to inspect his
  establishment&mdash;even though as early as two o&rsquo;clock he had to announce
  that nothing more was to be seen.
</p>
<p>
  The tour began with a view of the stables, where the party saw two mares
  (the one a grey, and the other a roan) and a colt; which latter animal,
  though far from showy, Nozdrev declared to have cost him ten thousand
  roubles.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You NEVER paid ten thousand roubles for the brute!&rdquo; exclaimed the
  brother-in-law. &ldquo;He isn&rsquo;t worth even a thousand.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;By God, I DID pay ten thousand!&rdquo; asserted Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You can swear that as much as you like,&rdquo; retorted the other.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Will you bet that I did not?&rdquo; asked Nozdrev, but the brother-in-law
  declined the offer.
</p>
<p>
  Next, Nozdrev showed his guests some empty stalls where a number of
  equally fine animals (so he alleged) had lately stood. Also there was on
  view the goat which an old belief still considers to be an indispensable
  adjunct to such places, even though its apparent use is to pace up and
  down beneath the noses of the horses as though the place belonged to it.
  Thereafter the host took his guests to look at a young wolf which he had
  got tied to a chain. &ldquo;He is fed on nothing but raw meat,&rdquo; he explained,
  &ldquo;for I want him to grow up as fierce as possible.&rdquo; Then the party
  inspected a pond in which there were &ldquo;fish of such a size that it would
  take two men all their time to lift one of them out.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  This piece of information was received with renewed incredulity on the
  part of the brother-in-law.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Now, Chichikov,&rdquo; went on Nozdrev, &ldquo;let me show you a truly magnificent
  brace of dogs. The hardness of their muscles will surprise you, and they
  have jowls as sharp as needles.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  So saying, he led the way to a small, but neatly-built, shed surrounded on
  every side with a fenced-in run. Entering this run, the visitors beheld a
  number of dogs of all sorts and sizes and colours. In their midst Nozdrev
  looked like a father lording it over his family circle. Erecting their
  tails&mdash;their &ldquo;stems,&rdquo; as dog fanciers call those members&mdash;the
  animals came bounding to greet the party, and fully a score of them laid
  their paws upon Chichikov&rsquo;s shoulders. Indeed, one dog was moved with such
  friendliness that, standing on its hind legs, it licked him on the lips,
  and so forced him to spit. That done, the visitors duly inspected the
  couple already mentioned, and expressed astonishment at their muscles.
  True enough, they were fine animals. Next, the party looked at a Crimean
  bitch which, though blind and fast nearing her end, had, two years ago,
  been a truly magnificent dog. At all events, so said Nozdrev. Next came
  another bitch&mdash;also blind; then an inspection of the water-mill,
  which lacked the spindle-socket wherein the upper stone ought to have been
  revolving&mdash;&ldquo;fluttering,&rdquo; to use the Russian peasant&rsquo;s quaint
  expression. &ldquo;But never mind,&rdquo; said Nozdrev. &ldquo;Let us proceed to the
  blacksmith&rsquo;s shop.&rdquo; So to the blacksmith&rsquo;s shop the party proceeded, and
  when the said shop had been viewed, Nozdrev said as he pointed to a field:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;In this field I have seen such numbers of hares as to render the ground
  quite invisible. Indeed, on one occasion I, with my own hands, caught a
  hare by the hind legs.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You never caught a hare by the hind legs with your hands!&rdquo; remarked the
  brother-in-law.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I DID&rdquo; reiterated Nozdrev. &ldquo;However, let me show you the boundary
  where my lands come to an end.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  So saying, he started to conduct his guests across a field which consisted
  mostly of moleheaps, and in which the party had to pick their way between
  strips of ploughed land and of harrowed. Soon Chichikov began to feel
  weary, for the terrain was so low-lying that in many spots water could be
  heard squelching underfoot, and though for a while the visitors watched
  their feet, and stepped carefully, they soon perceived that such a course
  availed them nothing, and took to following their noses, without either
  selecting or avoiding the spots where the mire happened to be deeper or
  the reverse. At length, when a considerable distance had been covered,
  they caught sight of a boundary-post and a narrow ditch.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That is the boundary,&rdquo; said Nozdrev. &ldquo;Everything that you see on this
  side of the post is mine, as well as the forest on the other side of it,
  and what lies beyond the forest.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;WHEN did that forest become yours?&rdquo; asked the brother-in-law. &ldquo;It cannot
  be long since you purchased it, for it never USED to be yours.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, it isn&rsquo;t long since I purchased it,&rdquo; said Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How long?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How long? Why, I purchased it three days ago, and gave a pretty sum for
  it, as the devil knows!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Indeed! Why, three days ago you were at the fair?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Wiseacre! Cannot one be at a fair and buy land at the same time? Yes, I
  WAS at the fair, and my steward bought the land in my absence.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, your STEWARD bought it.&rdquo; The brother-in-law seemed doubtful, and
  shook his head.
</p>
<p>
  The guests returned by the same route as that by which they had come;
  whereafter, on reaching the house, Nozdrev conducted them to his study,
  which contained not a trace of the things usually to be found in such
  apartments&mdash;such things as books and papers. On the contrary, the
  only articles to be seen were a sword and a brace of guns&mdash;the one
  &ldquo;of them worth three hundred roubles,&rdquo; and the other &ldquo;about eight
  hundred.&rdquo; The brother-in-law inspected the articles in question, and then
  shook his head as before. Next, the visitors were shown some &ldquo;real
  Turkish&rdquo; daggers, of which one bore the inadvertent inscription, &ldquo;Saveli
  Sibiriakov <a href="#linknote-19" name="linknoteref-19" id="linknoteref-19"><small>19</small></a>,
  Master Cutler.&rdquo; Then came a barrel-organ, on which Nozdrev started to play
  some tune or another. For a while the sounds were not wholly unpleasing,
  but suddenly something seemed to go wrong, for a mazurka started, to be
  followed by &ldquo;Marlborough has gone to the war,&rdquo; and to this, again, there
  succeeded an antiquated waltz. Also, long after Nozdrev had ceased to turn
  the handle, one particularly shrill-pitched pipe which had, throughout,
  refused to harmonise with the rest kept up a protracted whistling on its
  own account. Then followed an exhibition of tobacco pipes&mdash;pipes of
  clay, of wood, of meerschaum, pipes smoked and non-smoked; pipes wrapped
  in chamois leather and not so wrapped; an amber-mounted hookah (a stake
  won at cards) and a tobacco pouch (worked, it was alleged, by some
  countess who had fallen in love with Nozdrev at a posthouse, and whose
  handiwork Nozdrev averred to constitute the &ldquo;sublimity of superfluity&rdquo;&mdash;a
  term which, in the Nozdrevian vocabulary, purported to signify the acme of
  perfection).
</p>
<p>
  Finally, after some hors-d&rsquo;oeuvres of sturgeon&rsquo;s back, they sat down to
  table&mdash;the time being then nearly five o&rsquo;clock. But the meal did not
  constitute by any means the best of which Chichikov had ever partaken,
  seeing that some of the dishes were overcooked, and others were scarcely
  cooked at all. Evidently their compounder had trusted chiefly to
  inspiration&mdash;she had laid hold of the first thing which had happened
  to come to hand. For instance, had pepper represented the nearest article
  within reach, she had added pepper wholesale. Had a cabbage chanced to be
  so encountered, she had pressed it also into the service. And the same
  with milk, bacon, and peas. In short, her rule seemed to have been &ldquo;Make a
  hot dish of some sort, and some sort of taste will result.&rdquo; For the rest,
  Nozdrev drew heavily upon the wine. Even before the soup had been served,
  he had poured out for each guest a bumper of port and another of &ldquo;haut&rdquo;
   sauterne. (Never in provincial towns is ordinary, vulgar sauterne even
  procurable.) Next, he called for a bottle of madeira&mdash;&ldquo;as fine a
  tipple as ever a field-marshall drank&rdquo;; but the madeira only burnt the
  mouth, since the dealers, familiar with the taste of our landed gentry
  (who love &ldquo;good&rdquo; madeira) invariably doctor the stuff with copious dashes
  of rum and Imperial vodka, in the hope that Russian stomachs will thus be
  enabled to carry off the lot. After this bottle Nozdrev called for another
  and &ldquo;a very special&rdquo; brand&mdash;a brand which he declared to consist of a
  blend of burgundy and champagne, and of which he poured generous measures
  into the glasses of Chichikov and the brother-in-law as they sat to right
  and left of him. But since Chichikov noticed that, after doing so, he
  added only a scanty modicum of the mixture to his own tumbler, our hero
  determined to be cautious, and therefore took advantage of a moment when
  Nozdrev had again plunged into conversation and was yet a third time
  engaged in refilling his brother-in-law&rsquo;s glass, to contrive to upset his
  (Chichikov&rsquo;s) glass over his plate. In time there came also to table a
  tart of mountain-ashberries&mdash;berries which the host declared to
  equal, in taste, ripe plums, but which, curiously enough, smacked more of
  corn brandy. Next, the company consumed a sort of pasty of which the
  precise name has escaped me, but which the host rendered differently even
  on the second occasion of its being mentioned. The meal over, and the
  whole tale of wines tried, the guests still retained their seats&mdash;a
  circumstance which embarrassed Chichikov, seeing that he had no mind to
  propound his pet scheme in the presence of Nozdrev&rsquo;s brother-in-law, who
  was a complete stranger to him. No, that subject called for amicable and
  PRIVATE conversation. Nevertheless, the brother-in-law appeared to bode
  little danger, seeing that he had taken on board a full cargo, and was now
  engaged in doing nothing of a more menacing nature than picking his nose.
  At length he himself noticed that he was not altogether in a responsible
  condition; wherefore he rose and began to make excuses for departing
  homewards, though in a tone so drowsy and lethargic that, to quote the
  Russian proverb, he might almost have been &ldquo;pulling a collar on to a horse
  by the clasps.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no!&rdquo; cried Nozdrev. &ldquo;I am NOT going to let you go.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I MUST go,&rdquo; replied the brother-in-law. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t dry to hinder me. You
  are annoying me greatly.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Rubbish! We are going to play a game of banker.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no. You must play it without me, my friend. My wife is expecting me
  at home, and I must go and tell her all about the fair. Yes, I MUST go if
  I am to please her. Do not try to detain me.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your wife be&mdash;! But have you REALLY an important piece of business
  with her?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, my friend. The real reason is that she is a good and trustful
  woman, and that she does a great deal for me. The tears spring to my eyes
  as I think of it. Do not detain me. As an honourable man I say that I must
  go. Of that I do assure you in all sincerity.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, let him go,&rdquo; put in Chichikov under his breath. &ldquo;What use will he be
  here?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said Nozdrev, &ldquo;though, damn it, I do not like fellows who
  lose their heads.&rdquo; Then he added to his brother-in-law: &ldquo;All right, Thetuk
  <a href="#linknote-20" name="linknoteref-20" id="linknoteref-20"><small>20</small></a>.
  Off you go to your wife and your woman&rsquo;s talk and may the devil go with
  you!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do not insult me with the term Thetuk,&rdquo; retorted the brother-in-law. &ldquo;To
  her I owe my life, and she is a dear, good woman, and has shown me much
  affection. At the very thought of it I could weep. You see, she will be
  asking me what I have seen at the fair, and tell her about it I must, for
  she is such a dear, good woman.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then off you go to her with your pack of lies. Here is your cap.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, good friend, you are not to speak of her like that. By so doing you
  offend me greatly&mdash;I say that she is a dear, good woman.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then run along home to her.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, I am just going. Excuse me for having been unable to stay. Gladly
  would I have stayed, but really I cannot.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The brother-in-law repeated his excuses again and again without noticing
  that he had entered the britchka, that it had passed through the gates,
  and that he was now in the open country. Permissibly we may suppose that
  his wife succeeded in gleaning from him few details of the fair.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a fool!&rdquo; said Nozdrev as, standing by the window, he watched the
  departing vehicle. &ldquo;Yet his off-horse is not such a bad one. For a long
  time past I have been wanting to get hold of it. A man like that is simply
  impossible. Yes, he is a Thetuk, a regular Thetuk.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  With that they repaired to the parlour, where, on Porphyri bringing
  candles, Chichikov perceived that his host had produced a pack of cards.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I tell you what,&rdquo; said Nozdrev, pressing the sides of the pack together,
  and then slightly bending them, so that the pack cracked and a card flew
  out. &ldquo;How would it be if, to pass the time, I were to make a bank of three
  hundred?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov pretended not to have heard him, but remarked with an air of
  having just recollected a forgotten point:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;By the way, I had omitted to say that I have a request to make of you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What request?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;First give me your word that you will grant it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What is the request, I say?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you give me your word, do you?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Certainly.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your word of honour?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;My word of honour.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This, then, is my request. I presume that you have a large number of dead
  serfs whose names have not yet been removed from the revision list?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have. But why do you ask?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because I want you to make them over to me.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Of what use would they be to you?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Never mind. I have a purpose in wanting them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What purpose?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A purpose which is strictly my own affair. In short, I need them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You seem to have hatched a very fine scheme. Out with it, now! What is in
  the wind?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How could I have hatched such a scheme as you say? One could not very
  well hatch a scheme out of such a trifle as this.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then for what purpose do you want the serfs?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, the curiosity of the man! He wants to poke his fingers into and smell
  over every detail!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why do you decline to say what is in your mind? At all events, until you
  DO say I shall not move in the matter.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But how would it benefit you to know what my plans are? A whim has seized
  me. That is all. Nor are you playing fair. You have given me your word of
  honour, yet now you are trying to back out of it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No matter what you desire me to do, I decline to do it until you have
  told me your purpose.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What am I to say to the fellow?&rdquo; thought Chichikov. He reflected for a
  moment, and then explained that he wanted the dead souls in order to
  acquire a better standing in society, since at present he possessed little
  landed property, and only a handful of serfs.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are lying,&rdquo; said Nozdrev without even letting him finish. &ldquo;Yes, you
  are lying my good friend.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov himself perceived that his device had been a clumsy one, and his
  pretext weak. &ldquo;I must tell him straight out,&rdquo; he said to himself as he
  pulled his wits together.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Should I tell you the truth,&rdquo; he added aloud, &ldquo;I must beg of you not to
  repeat it. The truth is that I am thinking of getting married. But,
  unfortunately, my betrothed&rsquo;s father and mother are very ambitious people,
  and do not want me to marry her, since they desire the bridegroom to own
  not less than three hundred souls, whereas I own but a hundred and fifty,
  and that number is not sufficient.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Again you are lying,&rdquo; said Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then look here; I have been lying only to this extent.&rdquo; And Chichikov
  marked off upon his little finger a minute portion.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nevertheless I will bet my head that you have been lying throughout.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Come, come! That is not very civil of you. Why should I have been lying?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because I know you, and know that you are a regular skinflint. I say that
  in all friendship. If I possessed any power over you I should hang you to
  the nearest tree.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  This remark hurt Chichikov, for at any time he disliked expressions gross
  or offensive to decency, and never allowed any one&mdash;no, not even
  persons of the highest rank&mdash;to behave towards him with an undue
  measure of familiarity. Consequently his sense of umbrage on the present
  occasion was unbounded.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;By God, I WOULD hang you!&rdquo; repeated Nozdrev. &ldquo;I say this frankly, and not
  for the purpose of offending you, but simply to communicate to you my
  friendly opinion.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;To everything there are limits,&rdquo; retorted Chichikov stiffly. &ldquo;If you want
  to indulge in speeches of that sort you had better return to the
  barracks.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  However, after a pause he added:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;If you do not care to give me the serfs, why not SELL them?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;SELL them? <i>I</i> know you, you rascal! You wouldn&rsquo;t give me very much
  for them, WOULD you?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A nice fellow! Look here. What are they to you? So many diamonds, eh?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I thought so! <i>I</i> know you!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Pardon me, but I could wish that you were a member of the Jewish
  persuasion. You would give them to me fast enough then.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;On the contrary, to show you that I am not a usurer, I will decline to
  ask of you a single kopeck for the serfs. All that you need do is to buy
  that colt of mine, and then I will throw in the serfs in addition.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But what should <i>I</i> want with your colt?&rdquo; said Chichikov, genuinely
  astonished at the proposal.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What should YOU want with him? Why, I have bought him for ten thousand
  roubles, and am ready to let you have him for four.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I ask you again: of what use could the colt possibly be to me? I am not
  the keeper of a breeding establishment.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah! I see that you fail to understand me. Let me suggest that you pay
  down at once three thousand roubles of the purchase money, and leave the
  other thousand until later.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I do not mean to buy the colt, damn him!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then buy the roan mare.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, nor the roan mare.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you shall have both the mare and the grey horse which you have seen
  in my stables for two thousand roubles.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I require no horses at all.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But you would be able to sell them again. You would be able to get thrice
  their purchase price at the very first fair that was held.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then sell them at that fair yourself, seeing that you are so certain of
  making a triple profit.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, I should make it fast enough, only I want YOU to benefit by the
  transaction.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov duly thanked his interlocutor, but continued to decline either
  the grey horse or the roan mare.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then buy a few dogs,&rdquo; said Nozdrev. &ldquo;I can sell you a couple of hides
  a-quiver, ears well pricked, coats like quills, ribs barrel-shaped, and
  paws so tucked up as scarcely to graze the ground when they run.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Of what use would those dogs be to me? I am not a sportsman.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I WANT you to have the dogs. Listen. If you won&rsquo;t have the dogs, then
  buy my barrel-organ. &lsquo;Tis a splendid instrument. As a man of honour I can
  tell you that, when new, it cost me fifteen hundred roubles. Well, you
  shall have it for nine hundred.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Come, come! What should I want with a barrel-organ? I am not a German, to
  go hauling it about the roads and begging for coppers.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But this is quite a different kind of organ from the one which Germans
  take about with them. You see, it is a REAL organ. Look at it for
  yourself. It is made of the best wood. I will take you to have another
  view of it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  And seizing Chichikov by the hand, Nozdrev drew him towards the other
  room, where, in spite of the fact that Chichikov, with his feet planted
  firmly on the floor, assured his host, again and again, that he knew
  exactly what the organ was like, he was forced once more to hear how
  Marlborough went to the war.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then, since you don&rsquo;t care to give me any money for it,&rdquo; persisted
  Nozdrev, &ldquo;listen to the following proposal. I will give you the
  barrel-organ and all the dead souls which I possess, and in return you
  shall give me your britchka, and another three hundred roubles into the
  bargain.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Listen to the man! In that case, what should I have left to drive in?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, I would stand you another britchka. Come to the coach-house, and I
  will show you the one I mean. It only needs repainting to look a perfectly
  splendid britchka.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The ramping, incorrigible devil!&rdquo; thought Chichikov to himself as at all
  hazards he resolved to escape from britchkas, organs, and every species of
  dog, however marvellously barrel-ribbed and tucked up of paw.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And in exchange, you shall have the britchka, the barrel-organ, and the
  dead souls,&rdquo; repeated Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I must decline the offer,&rdquo; said Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And why?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because I don&rsquo;t WANT the things&mdash;I am full up already.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I can see that you don&rsquo;t know how things should be done between good
  friends and comrades. Plainly you are a man of two faces.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What do you mean, you fool? Think for yourself. Why should I acquire
  articles which I don&rsquo;t want?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Say no more about it, if you please. I have quite taken your measure. But
  see here. Should you care to play a game of banker? I am ready to stake
  both the dead souls and the barrel-organ at cards.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No; to leave an issue to cards means to submit oneself to the unknown,&rdquo;
   said Chichikov, covertly glancing at the pack which Nozdrev had got in his
  hands. Somehow the way in which his companion had cut that pack seemed to
  him suspicious.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why &lsquo;to the unknown&rsquo;?&rdquo; asked Nozdrev. &ldquo;There is no such thing as &lsquo;the
  unknown.&rsquo; Should luck be on your side, you may win the devil knows what a
  haul. Oh, luck, luck!&rdquo; he went on, beginning to deal, in the hope of
  raising a quarrel. &ldquo;Here is the cursed nine upon which, the other night, I
  lost everything. All along I knew that I should lose my money. Said I to
  myself: &lsquo;The devil take you, you false, accursed card!&rsquo;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Just as Nozdrev uttered the words Porphyri entered with a fresh bottle of
  liquor; but Chichikov declined either to play or to drink.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why do you refuse to play?&rdquo; asked Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because I feel indisposed to do so. Moreover, I must confess that I am no
  great hand at cards.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;WHY are you no great hand at them?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov shrugged his shoulders. &ldquo;Because I am not,&rdquo; he replied.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are no great hand at ANYTHING, I think.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What does that matter? God has made me so.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The truth is that you are a Thetuk, and nothing else. Once upon a time I
  believed you to be a good fellow, but now I see that you don&rsquo;t understand
  civility. One cannot speak to you as one would to an intimate, for there
  is no frankness or sincerity about you. You are a regular Sobakevitch&mdash;just
  such another as he.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;For what reason are you abusing me? Am I in any way at fault for
  declining to play cards? Sell me those souls if you are the man to
  hesitate over such rubbish.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The foul fiend take you! I was about to have given them to you for
  nothing, but now you shan&rsquo;t have them at all&mdash;not if you offer me
  three kingdoms in exchange. Henceforth I will have nothing to do with you,
  you cobbler, you dirty blacksmith! Porphyri, go and tell the ostler to
  give the gentleman&rsquo;s horses no oats, but only hay.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  This development Chichikov had hardly expected.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And do you,&rdquo; added Nozdrev to his guest, &ldquo;get out of my sight.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Yet in spite of this, host and guest took supper together&mdash;even
  though on this occasion the table was adorned with no wines of fictitious
  nomenclature, but only with a bottle which reared its solitary head beside
  a jug of what is usually known as vin ordinaire. When supper was over
  Nozdrev said to Chichikov as he conducted him to a side room where a bed
  had been made up:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This is where you are to sleep. I cannot very well wish you good-night.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Left to himself on Nozdrev&rsquo;s departure, Chichikov felt in a most
  unenviable frame of mind. Full of inward vexation, he blamed himself
  bitterly for having come to see this man and so wasted valuable time; but
  even more did he blame himself for having told him of his scheme&mdash;for
  having acted as carelessly as a child or a madman. Of a surety the scheme
  was not one which ought to have been confided to a man like Nozdrev, for
  he was a worthless fellow who might lie about it, and append additions to
  it, and spread such stories as would give rise to God knows what scandals.
  &ldquo;This is indeed bad!&rdquo; Chichikov said to himself. &ldquo;I have been an absolute
  fool.&rdquo; Consequently he spent an uneasy night&mdash;this uneasiness being
  increased by the fact that a number of small, but vigorous, insects so
  feasted upon him that he could do nothing but scratch the spots and
  exclaim, &ldquo;The devil take you and Nozdrev alike!&rdquo; Only when morning was
  approaching did he fall asleep. On rising, he made it his first business
  (after donning dressing-gown and slippers) to cross the courtyard to the
  stable, for the purpose of ordering Selifan to harness the britchka. Just
  as he was returning from his errand he encountered Nozdrev, clad in a
  dressing-gown, and holding a pipe between his teeth.
</p>
<p>
  Host and guest greeted one another in friendly fashion, and Nozdrev
  inquired how Chichikov had slept.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Fairly well,&rdquo; replied Chichikov, but with a touch of dryness in his tone.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The same with myself,&rdquo; said Nozdrev. &ldquo;The truth is that such a lot of
  nasty brutes kept crawling over me that even to speak of it gives me the
  shudders. Likewise, as the effect of last night&rsquo;s doings, a whole squadron
  of soldiers seemed to be camping on my chest, and giving me a flogging.
  Ugh! And whom also do you think I saw in a dream? You would never guess.
  Why, it was Staff-Captain Potsieluev and Lieutenant Kuvshinnikov!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; though Chichikov to himself, &ldquo;and I wish that they too would give
  you a public thrashing!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I felt so ill!&rdquo; went on Nozdrev. &ldquo;And just after I had fallen asleep
  something DID come and sting me. Probably it was a party of hag fleas.
  Now, dress yourself, and I will be with you presently. First of all I must
  give that scoundrel of a bailiff a wigging.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov departed to his own room to wash and dress; which process
  completed, he entered the dining-room to find the table laid with
  tea-things and a bottle of rum. Clearly no broom had yet touched the
  place, for there remained traces of the previous night&rsquo;s dinner and supper
  in the shape of crumbs thrown over the floor and tobacco ash on the
  tablecloth. The host himself, when he entered, was still clad in a
  dressing-gown exposing a hairy chest; and as he sat holding his pipe in
  his hand, and drinking tea from a cup, he would have made a model for the
  sort of painter who prefers to portray gentlemen of the less curled and
  scented order.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What think you?&rdquo; he asked of Chichikov after a short silence. &ldquo;Are you
  willing NOW to play me for those souls?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have told you that I never play cards. If the souls are for sale, I
  will buy them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I decline to sell them. Such would not be the course proper between
  friends. But a game of banker would be quite another matter. Let us deal
  the cards.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have told you that I decline to play.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And you will not agree to an exchange?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then look here. Suppose we play a game of chess. If you win, the souls
  shall be yours. There are lots which I should like to see crossed off the
  revision list. Hi, Porphyri! Bring me the chessboard.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are wasting your time. I will play neither chess nor cards.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But chess is different from playing with a bank. In chess there can be
  neither luck nor cheating, for everything depends upon skill. In fact, I
  warn you that I cannot possibly play with you unless you allow me a move
  or two in advance.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The same with me,&rdquo; thought Chichikov. &ldquo;Shall I, or shall I not, play this
  fellow? I used not to be a bad chess-player, and it is a sport in which he
  would find it more difficult to be up to his tricks.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; he added aloud. &ldquo;I WILL play you at chess.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And stake the souls for a hundred roubles?&rdquo; asked Nozdrev.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No. Why for a hundred? Would it not be sufficient to stake them for
  fifty?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No. What would be the use of fifty? Nevertheless, for the hundred roubles
  I will throw in a moderately old puppy, or else a gold seal and
  watch-chain.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; assented Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then how many moves are you going to allow me?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Is THAT to be part of the bargain? Why, none, of course.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;At least allow me two.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, none. I myself am only a poor player.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;<i>I</i> know you and your poor play,&rdquo; said Nozdrev, moving a chessman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;In fact, it is a long time since last I had a chessman in my hand,&rdquo;
   replied Chichikov, also moving a piece.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah! <i>I</i> know you and your poor play,&rdquo; repeated Nozdrev, moving a
  second chessman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I say again that it is a long time since last I had a chessman in my
  hand.&rdquo; And Chichikov, in his turn, moved.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah! <i>I</i> know you and your poor play,&rdquo; repeated Nozdrev, for the
  third time as he made a third move. At the same moment the cuff of one of
  his sleeves happened to dislodge another chessman from its position.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Again, I say,&rdquo; said Chichikov, &ldquo;that &lsquo;tis a long time since last&mdash;But
  hi! look here! Put that piece back in its place!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What piece?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This one.&rdquo; And almost as Chichikov spoke he saw a third chessman coming
  into view between the queens. God only knows whence that chessman had
  materialised.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no!&rdquo; shouted Chichikov as he rose from the table. &ldquo;It is impossible
  to play with a man like you. People don&rsquo;t move three pieces at once.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How &lsquo;three pieces&rsquo;? All that I have done is to make a mistake&mdash;to
  move one of my pieces by accident. If you like, I will forfeit it to you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And whence has the third piece come?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What third piece?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The one now standing between the queens?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;&lsquo;Tis one of your own pieces. Surely you are forgetting?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, my friend. I have counted every move, and can remember each one.
  That piece has only just become added to the board. Put it back in its
  place, I say.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Its place? Which IS its place?&rdquo; But Nozdrev had reddened a good deal. &ldquo;I
  perceive you to be a strategist at the game.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, good friend. YOU are the strategist&mdash;though an unsuccessful
  one, as it happens.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then of what are you supposing me capable? Of cheating you?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am not supposing you capable of anything. All that I say is that I will
  not play with you any more.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But you can&rsquo;t refuse to,&rdquo; said Nozdrev, growing heated. &ldquo;You see, the
  game has begun.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nevertheless, I have a right not to continue it, seeing that you are not
  playing as an honest man should do.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are lying&mdash;you cannot truthfully say that.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;&lsquo;Tis you who are lying.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I have NOT cheated. Consequently you cannot refuse to play, but must
  continue the game to a finish.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You cannot force me to play,&rdquo; retorted Chichikov coldly as, turning to
  the chessboard, he swept the pieces into confusion.
</p>
<p>
  Nozdrev approached Chichikov with a manner so threatening that the other
  fell back a couple of paces.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I WILL force you to play,&rdquo; said Nozdrev. &ldquo;It is no use you making a mess
  of the chessboard, for I can remember every move. We will replace the
  chessmen exactly as they were.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no, my friend. The game is over, and I play you no more.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You say that you will not?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes. Surely you can see for yourself that such a thing is impossible?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That cock won&rsquo;t fight. Say at once that you refuse to play with me.&rdquo; And
  Nozdrev approached a step nearer.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well; I DO say that,&rdquo; replied Chichikov, and at the same moment
  raised his hands towards his face, for the dispute was growing heated. Nor
  was the act of caution altogether unwarranted, for Nozdrev also raised his
  fist, and it may be that one of our hero&rsquo;s plump, pleasant-looking cheeks
  would have sustained an indelible insult had not he (Chichikov) parried
  the blow and, seizing Nozdrev by his whirling arms, held them fast.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Porphyri! Pavlushka!&rdquo; shouted Nozdrev as madly he strove to free himself.
</p>
<p>
  On hearing the words, Chichikov, both because he wished to avoid rendering
  the servants witnesses of the unedifying scene and because he felt that it
  would be of no avail to hold Nozdrev any longer, let go of the latter&rsquo;s
  arms; but at the same moment Porphyri and Pavlushka entered the room&mdash;a
  pair of stout rascals with whom it would be unwise to meddle.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do you, or do you not, intend to finish the game?&rdquo; said Nozdrev. &ldquo;Give me
  a direct answer.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No; it will not be possible to finish the game,&rdquo; replied Chichikov,
  glancing out of the window. He could see his britchka standing ready for
  him, and Selifan evidently awaiting orders to draw up to the entrance
  steps. But from the room there was no escape, since in the doorway was
  posted the couple of well-built serving-men.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then it is as I say? You refuse to finish the game?&rdquo; repeated Nozdrev,
  his face as red as fire.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I would have finished it had you played like a man of honour. But, as it
  is, I cannot.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You cannot, eh, you villain? You find that you cannot as soon as you find
  that you are not winning? Thrash him, you fellows!&rdquo; And as he spoke
  Nozdrev grasped the cherrywood shank of his pipe. Chichikov turned as
  white as a sheet. He tried to say something, but his quivering lips
  emitted no sound. &ldquo;Thrash him!&rdquo; again shouted Nozdrev as he rushed forward
  in a state of heat and perspiration more proper to a warrior who is
  attacking an impregnable fortress. &ldquo;Thrash him!&rdquo; again he shouted in a
  voice like that of some half-demented lieutenant whose desperate bravery
  has acquired such a reputation that orders have had to be issued that his
  hands shall be held lest he attempt deeds of over-presumptuous daring.
  Seized with the military spirit, however, the lieutenant&rsquo;s head begins to
  whirl, and before his eye there flits the image of Suvorov <a
  href="#linknote-21" name="linknoteref-21" id="linknoteref-21"><small>21</small></a>.
  He advances to the great encounter, and impulsively cries, &ldquo;Forward, my
  sons!&rdquo;&mdash;cries it without reflecting that he may be spoiling the plan
  of the general attack, that millions of rifles may be protruding their
  muzzles through the embrasures of the impregnable, towering walls of the
  fortress, that his own impotent assault may be destined to be dissipated
  like dust before the wind, and that already there may have been launched
  on its whistling career the bullet which is to close for ever his
  vociferous throat. However, if Nozdrev resembled the headstrong, desperate
  lieutenant whom we have just pictured as advancing upon a fortress, at
  least the fortress itself in no way resembled the impregnable stronghold
  which I have described. As a matter of fact, the fortress became seized
  with a panic which drove its spirit into its boots. First of all, the
  chair with which Chichikov (the fortress in question) sought to defend
  himself was wrested from his grasp by the serfs, and then&mdash;blinking
  and neither alive nor dead&mdash;he turned to parry the Circassian
  pipe-stem of his host. In fact, God only knows what would have happened
  had not the fates been pleased by a miracle to deliver Chichikov&rsquo;s elegant
  back and shoulders from the onslaught. Suddenly, and as unexpectedly as
  though the sound had come from the clouds, there made itself heard the
  tinkling notes of a collar-bell, and then the rumble of wheels approaching
  the entrance steps, and, lastly, the snorting and hard breathing of a team
  of horses as a vehicle came to a standstill. Involuntarily all present
  glanced through the window, and saw a man clad in a semi-military
  greatcoat leap from a buggy. After making an inquiry or two in the hall,
  he entered the dining-room just at the juncture when Chichikov, almost
  swooning with terror, had found himself placed in about as awkward a
  situation as could well befall a mortal man.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Kindly tell me which of you is Monsieur Nozdrev?&rdquo; said the unknown with a
  glance of perplexity both at the person named (who was still standing with
  pipe-shank upraised) and at Chichikov (who was just beginning to recover
  from his unpleasant predicament).
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Kindly tell ME whom I have the honour of addressing?&rdquo; retorted Nozdrev as
  he approached the official.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am the Superintendent of Rural Police.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And what do you want?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have come to fulfil a commission imposed upon me. That is to say, I
  have come to place you under arrest until your case shall have been
  decided.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Rubbish! What case, pray?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The case in which you involved yourself when, in a drunken condition, and
  through the instrumentality of a walking-stick, you offered grave offence
  to the person of Landowner Maksimov.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You lie! To your face I tell you that never in my life have I set eyes
  upon Landowner Maksimov.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good sir, allow me to represent to you that I am a Government officer.
  Speeches like that you may address to your servants, but not to me.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At this point Chichikov, without waiting for Nozdrev&rsquo;s reply, seized his
  cap, slipped behind the Superintendent&rsquo;s back, rushed out on to the
  verandah, sprang into his britchka, and ordered Selifan to drive like the
  wind.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0005" id="link2HCH0005">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
