<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>
  CHAPTER III
</h2>
<p>
  &ldquo;If Colonel Koshkarev should turn out to be as mad as the last one it is a
  bad look-out,&rdquo; said Chichikov to himself on opening his eyes amid fields
  and open country&mdash;everything else having disappeared save the vault
  of heaven and a couple of low-lying clouds.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Selifan,&rdquo; he went on, &ldquo;did you ask how to get to Colonel Koshkarev&rsquo;s?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, Paul Ivanovitch. At least, there was such a clatter around the
  koliaska that I could not; but Petrushka asked the coachman.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You fool! How often have I told you not to rely on Petrushka? Petrushka
  is a blockhead, an idiot. Besides, at the present moment I believe him to
  be drunk.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, you are wrong, barin,&rdquo; put in the person referred to, turning his
  head with a sidelong glance. &ldquo;After we get down the next hill we shall
  need but to keep bending round it. That is all.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, and I suppose you&rsquo;ll tell me that sivnkha is the only thing that has
  passed your lips? Well, the view at least is beautiful. In fact, when one
  has seen this place one may say that one has seen one of the beauty spots
  of Europe.&rdquo; This said, Chichikov added to himself, smoothing his chin:
  &ldquo;What a difference between the features of a civilised man of the world
  and those of a common lacquey!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Meanwhile the koliaska quickened its pace, and Chichikov once more caught
  sight of Tientietnikov&rsquo;s aspen-studded meadows. Undulating gently on
  elastic springs, the vehicle cautiously descended the steep incline, and
  then proceeded past water-mills, rumbled over a bridge or two, and jolted
  easily along the rough-set road which traversed the flats. Not a molehill,
  not a mound jarred the spine. The vehicle was comfort itself.
</p>
<p>
  Swiftly there flew by clumps of osiers, slender elder trees, and
  silver-leaved poplars, their branches brushing against Selifan and
  Petrushka, and at intervals depriving the valet of his cap. Each time that
  this happened, the sullen-faced servitor fell to cursing both the tree
  responsible for the occurrence and the landowner responsible for the tree
  being in existence; yet nothing would induce him thereafter either to tie
  on the cap or to steady it with his hand, so complete was his assurance
  that the accident would never be repeated. Soon to the foregoing trees
  there became added an occasional birch or spruce fir, while in the dense
  undergrowth around their roots could be seen the blue iris and the yellow
  wood-tulip. Gradually the forest grew darker, as though eventually the
  obscurity would become complete. Then through the trunks and the boughs
  there began to gleam points of light like glittering mirrors, and as the
  number of trees lessened, these points grew larger, until the travellers
  debouched upon the shore of a lake four versts or so in circumference, and
  having on its further margin the grey, scattered log huts of a peasant
  village. In the water a great commotion was in progress. In the first
  place, some twenty men, immersed to the knee, to the breast, or to the
  neck, were dragging a large fishing-net inshore, while, in the second
  place, there was entangled in the same, in addition to some fish, a stout
  man shaped precisely like a melon or a hogshead. Greatly excited, he was
  shouting at the top of his voice: &ldquo;Let Kosma manage it, you lout of a
  Denis! Kosma, take the end of the rope from Denis! Don&rsquo;t bear so hard on
  it, Thoma Bolshoy <a href="#linknote-41" name="linknoteref-41"
   id="linknoteref-41"><small>41</small></a>! Go where Thoma Menshov <a
  href="#linknote-42" name="linknoteref-42" id="linknoteref-42"><small>42</small></a>
  is! Damn it, bring the net to land, will you!&rdquo; From this it became clear
  that it was not on his own account that the stout man was worrying.
  Indeed, he had no need to do so, since his fat would in any case have
  prevented him from sinking. Yes, even if he had turned head over heels in
  an effort to dive, the water would persistently have borne him up; and the
  same if, say, a couple of men had jumped on his back&mdash;the only result
  would have been that he would have become a trifle deeper submerged, and
  forced to draw breath by spouting bubbles through his nose. No, the cause
  of his agitation was lest the net should break, and the fish escape:
  wherefore he was urging some additional peasants who were standing on the
  bank to lay hold of and to pull at, an extra rope or two.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That must be the barin&mdash;Colonel Koshkarev,&rdquo; said Selifan.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why?&rdquo; asked Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because, if you please, his skin is whiter than the rest, and he has the
  respectable paunch of a gentleman.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Meanwhile good progress was being made with the hauling in of the barin;
  until, feeling the ground with his feet, he rose to an upright position,
  and at the same moment caught sight of the koliaska, with Chichikov seated
  therein, descending the declivity.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Have you dined yet?&rdquo; shouted the barin as, still entangled in the net, he
  approached the shore with a huge fish on his back. With one hand shading
  his eyes from the sun, and the other thrown backwards, he looked, in point
  of pose, like the Medici Venus emerging from her bath.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No,&rdquo; replied Chichikov, raising his cap, and executing a series of bows.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then thank God for that,&rdquo; rejoined the gentleman.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why?&rdquo; asked Chichikov with no little curiosity, and still holding his cap
  over his head.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because of THIS. Cast off the net, Thoma Menshov, and pick up that
  sturgeon for the gentleman to see. Go and help him, Telepen Kuzma.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  With that the peasants indicated picked up by the head what was a
  veritable monster of a fish.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it a beauty&mdash;a sturgeon fresh run from the river?&rdquo; exclaimed
  the stout barin. &ldquo;And now let us be off home. Coachman, you can take the
  lower road through the kitchen garden. Run, you lout of a Thoma Bolshoy,
  and open the gate for him. He will guide you to the house, and I myself
  shall be along presently.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Thereupon the barelegged Thoma Bolshoy, clad in nothing but a shirt, ran
  ahead of the koliaska through the village, every hut of which had hanging
  in front of it a variety of nets, for the reason that every inhabitant of
  the place was a fisherman. Next, he opened a gate into a large vegetable
  enclosure, and thence the koliaska emerged into a square near a wooden
  church, with, showing beyond the latter, the roofs of the manorial
  homestead.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A queer fellow, that Koshkarev!&rdquo; said Chichikov to himself.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, whatever I may be, at least I&rsquo;m here,&rdquo; said a voice by his side.
  Chichikov looked round, and perceived that, in the meanwhile, the barin
  had dressed himself and overtaken the carriage. With a pair of yellow
  trousers he was wearing a grass-green jacket, and his neck was as
  guiltless of a collar as Cupid&rsquo;s. Also, as he sat sideways in his drozhki,
  his bulk was such that he completely filled the vehicle. Chichikov was
  about to make some remark or another when the stout gentleman disappeared;
  and presently his drozhki re-emerged into view at the spot where the fish
  had been drawn to land, and his voice could be heard reiterating
  exhortations to his serfs. Yet when Chichikov reached the verandah of the
  house he found, to his intense surprise, the stout gentleman waiting to
  welcome the visitor. How he had contrived to convey himself thither passed
  Chichikov&rsquo;s comprehension. Host and guest embraced three times, according
  to a bygone custom of Russia. Evidently the barin was one of the old
  school.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I bring you,&rdquo; said Chichikov, &ldquo;a greeting from his Excellency.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;From whom?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;From your relative General Alexander Dmitrievitch.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who is Alexander Dmitrievitch?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What? You do not know General Alexander Dmitrievitch Betrishev?&rdquo;
   exclaimed Chichikov with a touch of surprise.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, I do not,&rdquo; replied the gentleman.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov&rsquo;s surprise grew to absolute astonishment.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How comes that about?&rdquo; he ejaculated. &ldquo;I hope that I have the honour of
  addressing Colonel Koshkarev?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Your hopes are vain. It is to my house, not to his, that you have come;
  and I am Peter Petrovitch Pietukh&mdash;yes, Peter Petrovitch Pietukh.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov, dumbfounded, turned to Selifan and Petrushka.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo; he exclaimed. &ldquo;I told you to drive to the house of
  Colonel Koshkarev, whereas you have brought me to that of Peter Petrovitch
  Pietukh.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;All the same, your fellows have done quite right,&rdquo; put in the gentleman
  referred to. &ldquo;Do you&rdquo; (this to Selifan and Petrushka) &ldquo;go to the kitchen,
  where they will give you a glassful of vodka apiece. Then put up the
  horses, and be off to the servants&rsquo; quarters.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I regret the mistake extremely,&rdquo; said Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But it is not a mistake. When you have tried the dinner which I have in
  store for you, just see whether you think IT a mistake. Enter, I beg of
  you.&rdquo; And, taking Chichikov by the arm, the host conducted him within,
  where they were met by a couple of youths.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let me introduce my two sons, home for their holidays from the Gymnasium
  <a href="#linknote-43" name="linknoteref-43" id="linknoteref-43"><small>43</small></a>,&rdquo;
   said Pietukh. &ldquo;Nikolasha, come and entertain our good visitor, while you,
  Aleksasha, follow me.&rdquo; And with that the host disappeared.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov turned to Nikolasha, whom he found to be a budding man about
  town, since at first he opened a conversation by stating that, as no good
  was to be derived from studying at a provincial institution, he and his
  brother desired to remove, rather, to St. Petersburg, the provinces not
  being worth living in.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I quite understand,&rdquo; Chichikov thought to himself. &ldquo;The end of the
  chapter will be confectioners&rsquo; assistants and the boulevards.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Tell me,&rdquo; he added aloud, &ldquo;how does your father&rsquo;s property at present
  stand?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It is all mortgaged,&rdquo; put in the father himself as he re-entered the
  room. &ldquo;Yes, it is all mortgaged, every bit of it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a pity!&rdquo; thought Chichikov. &ldquo;At this rate it will not be long before
  this man has no property at all left. I must hurry my departure.&rdquo; Aloud he
  said with an air of sympathy: &ldquo;That you have mortgaged the estate seems to
  me a matter of regret.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, not at all,&rdquo; replied Pietukh. &ldquo;In fact, they tell me that it is a
  good thing to do, and that every one else is doing it. Why should I act
  differently from my neighbours? Moreover, I have had enough of living
  here, and should like to try Moscow&mdash;more especially since my sons
  are always begging me to give them a metropolitan education.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oh, the fool, the fool!&rdquo; reflected Chichikov. &ldquo;He is for throwing up
  everything and making spendthrifts of his sons. Yet this is a nice
  property, and it is clear that the local peasants are doing well, and that
  the family, too, is comfortably off. On the other hand, as soon as ever
  these lads begin their education in restaurants and theatres, the devil
  will away with every stick of their substance. For my own part, I could
  desire nothing better than this quiet life in the country.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let me guess what is in your mind,&rdquo; said Pietukh.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What, then?&rdquo; asked Chichikov, rather taken aback.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are thinking to yourself: &lsquo;That fool of a Pietukh has asked me to
  dinner, yet not a bite of dinner do I see.&rsquo; But wait a little. It will be
  ready presently, for it is being cooked as fast as a maiden who has had
  her hair cut off plaits herself a new set of tresses.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Here comes Platon Mikhalitch, father!&rdquo; exclaimed Aleksasha, who had been
  peeping out of the window.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, and on a grey horse,&rdquo; added his brother.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who is Platon Mikhalitch?&rdquo; inquired Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A neighbour of ours, and an excellent fellow.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The next moment Platon Mikhalitch himself entered the room, accompanied by
  a sporting dog named Yarb. He was a tall, handsome man, with extremely red
  hair. As for his companion, it was of the keen-muzzled species used for
  shooting.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Have you dined yet?&rdquo; asked the host.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; replied Platon.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Indeed! What do you mean by coming here to laugh at us all? Do I ever go
  to YOUR place after dinner?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The newcomer smiled. &ldquo;Well, if it can bring you any comfort,&rdquo; he said,
  &ldquo;let me tell you that I ate nothing at the meal, for I had no appetite.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But you should see what I have caught&mdash;what sort of a sturgeon fate
  has brought my way! Yes, and what crucians and carp!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Really it tires one to hear you. How come you always to be so cheerful?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And how come YOU always to be so gloomy?&rdquo; retorted the host.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How, you ask? Simply because I am so.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The truth is you don&rsquo;t eat enough. Try the plan of making a good dinner.
  Weariness of everything is a modern invention. Once upon a time one never
  heard of it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, boast away, but have you yourself never been tired of things?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Never in my life. I do not so much as know whether I should find time to
  be tired. In the morning, when one awakes, the cook is waiting, and the
  dinner has to be ordered. Then one drinks one&rsquo;s morning tea, and then the
  bailiff arrives for HIS orders, and then there is fishing to be done, and
  then one&rsquo;s dinner has to be eaten. Next, before one has even had a chance
  to utter a snore, there enters once again the cook, and one has to order
  supper; and when she has departed, behold, back she comes with a request
  for the following day&rsquo;s dinner! What time does THAT leave one to be weary
  of things?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Throughout this conversation, Chichikov had been taking stock of the
  newcomer, who astonished him with his good looks, his upright, picturesque
  figure, his appearance of fresh, unwasted youthfulness, and the boyish
  purity, innocence, and clarity of his features. Neither passion nor care
  nor aught of the nature of agitation or anxiety of mind had ventured to
  touch his unsullied face, or to lay a single wrinkle thereon. Yet the
  touch of life which those emotions might have imparted was wanting. The
  face was, as it were, dreaming, even though from time to time an ironical
  smile disturbed it.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I, too, cannot understand,&rdquo; remarked Chichikov, &ldquo;how a man of your
  appearance can find things wearisome. Of course, if a man is hard pressed
  for money, or if he has enemies who are lying in wait for his life (as
  have certain folk of whom I know), well, then&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Believe me when I say,&rdquo; interrupted the handsome guest, &ldquo;that, for the
  sake of a diversion, I should be glad of ANY sort of an anxiety. Would
  that some enemy would conceive a grudge against me! But no one does so.
  Everything remains eternally dull.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But perhaps you lack a sufficiency of land or souls?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Not at all. I and my brother own ten thousand desiatins <a
  href="#linknote-44" name="linknoteref-44" id="linknoteref-44"><small>44</small></a>
  of land, and over a thousand souls.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Curious! I do not understand it. But perhaps the harvest has failed, or
  you have sickness about, and many of your male peasants have died of it?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;On the contrary, everything is in splendid order, for my brother is the
  best of managers.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then to find things wearisome!&rdquo; exclaimed Chichikov. &ldquo;It passes my
  comprehension.&rdquo; And he shrugged his shoulders.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, we will soon put weariness to flight,&rdquo; interrupted the host.
  &ldquo;Aleksasha, do you run helter-skelter to the kitchen, and there tell the
  cook to serve the fish pasties. Yes, and where have that gawk of an
  Emelian and that thief of an Antoshka got to? Why have they not handed
  round the zakuski?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At this moment the door opened, and the &ldquo;gawk&rdquo; and the &ldquo;thief&rdquo; in question
  made their appearance with napkins and a tray&mdash;the latter bearing six
  decanters of variously-coloured beverages. These they placed upon the
  table, and then ringed them about with glasses and platefuls of every
  conceivable kind of appetiser. That done, the servants applied themselves
  to bringing in various comestibles under covers, through which could be
  heard the hissing of hot roast viands. In particular did the &ldquo;gawk&rdquo; and
  the &ldquo;thief&rdquo; work hard at their tasks. As a matter of fact, their
  appellations had been given them merely to spur them to greater activity,
  for, in general, the barin was no lover of abuse, but, rather, a
  kind-hearted man who, like most Russians, could not get on without a sharp
  word or two. That is to say, he needed them for his tongue as he need a
  glass of vodka for his digestion. What else could you expect? It was his
  nature to care for nothing mild.
</p>
<p>
  To the zakuski succeeded the meal itself, and the host became a perfect
  glutton on his guests&rsquo; behalf. Should he notice that a guest had taken but
  a single piece of a comestible, he added thereto another one, saying:
  &ldquo;Without a mate, neither man nor bird can live in this world.&rdquo; Should any
  one take two pieces, he added thereto a third, saying: &ldquo;What is the good
  of the number 2? God loves a trinity.&rdquo; Should any one take three pieces,
  he would say: &ldquo;Where do you see a waggon with three wheels? Who builds a
  three-cornered hut?&rdquo; Lastly, should any one take four pieces, he would cap
  them with a fifth, and add thereto the punning quip, &ldquo;Na piat opiat <a
  href="#linknote-45" name="linknoteref-45" id="linknoteref-45"><small>45</small></a>&rdquo;.
  After devouring at least twelve steaks of sturgeon, Chichikov ventured to
  think to himself, &ldquo;My host cannot possibly add to THEM,&rdquo; but found that he
  was mistaken, for, without a word, Pietukh heaped upon his plate an
  enormous portion of spit-roasted veal, and also some kidneys. And what
  veal it was!
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That calf was fed two years on milk,&rdquo; he explained. &ldquo;I cared for it like
  my own son.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nevertheless I can eat no more,&rdquo; said Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do you try the veal before you say that you can eat no more.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I could not get it down my throat. There is no room left.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;If there be no room in a church for a newcomer, the beadle is sent for,
  and room is very soon made&mdash;yes, even though before there was such a
  crush that an apple couldn&rsquo;t have been dropped between the people. Do you
  try the veal, I say. That piece is the titbit of all.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  So Chichikov made the attempt; and in very truth the veal was beyond all
  praise, and room was found for it, even though one would have supposed the
  feat impossible.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Fancy this good fellow removing to St. Petersburg or Moscow!&rdquo; said the
  guest to himself. &ldquo;Why, with a scale of living like this, he would be
  ruined in three years.&rdquo; For that matter, Pietukh might well have been
  ruined already, for hospitality can dissipate a fortune in three months as
  easily as it can in three years.
</p>
<p>
  The host also dispensed the wine with a lavish hand, and what the guests
  did not drink he gave to his sons, who thus swallowed glass after glass.
  Indeed, even before coming to table, it was possible to discern to what
  department of human accomplishment their bent was turned. When the meal
  was over, however, the guests had no mind for further drinking. Indeed, it
  was all that they could do to drag themselves on to the balcony, and there
  to relapse into easy chairs. Indeed, the moment that the host subsided
  into his seat&mdash;it was large enough for four&mdash;he fell asleep, and
  his portly presence, converting itself into a sort of blacksmith&rsquo;s
  bellows, started to vent, through open mouth and distended nostrils, such
  sounds as can have greeted the reader&rsquo;s ear but seldom&mdash;sounds as of
  a drum being beaten in combination with the whistling of a flute and the
  strident howling of a dog.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Listen to him!&rdquo; said Platon.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov smiled.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Naturally, on such dinners as that,&rdquo; continued the other, &ldquo;our host does
  NOT find the time dull. And as soon as dinner is ended there can ensue
  sleep.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, but, pardon me, I still fail to understand why you should find life
  wearisome. There are so many resources against ennui!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;As for instance?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;For a young man, dancing, the playing of one or another musical
  instrument, and&mdash;well, yes, marriage.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Marriage to whom?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;To some maiden who is both charming and rich. Are there none in these
  parts?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then, were I you, I should travel, and seek a maiden elsewhere.&rdquo; And a
  brilliant idea therewith entered Chichikov&rsquo;s head. &ldquo;This last resource,&rdquo;
   he added, &ldquo;is the best of all resources against ennui.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What resource are you speaking of?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Of travel.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But whither?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, should it so please you, you might join me as my companion.&rdquo; This
  said, the speaker added to himself as he eyed Platon: &ldquo;Yes, that would
  suit me exactly, for then I should have half my expenses paid, and could
  charge him also with the cost of mending the koliaska.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And whither should we go?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;In that respect I am not wholly my own master, as I have business to do
  for others as well as for myself. For instance, General Betristchev&mdash;an
  intimate friend and, I might add, a generous benefactor of mine&mdash;has
  charged me with commissions to certain of his relatives. However, though
  relatives are relatives, I am travelling likewise on my own account, since
  I wish to see the world and the whirligig of humanity&mdash;which, in
  spite of what people may say, is as good as a living book or a second
  education.&rdquo; As a matter of fact, Chichikov was reflecting, &ldquo;Yes, the plan
  is an excellent one. I might even contrive that he should have to bear the
  whole of our expenses, and that his horses should be used while my own
  should be put out to graze on his farm.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, why should I not adopt the suggestion?&rdquo; was Platon&rsquo;s thought.
  &ldquo;There is nothing for me to do at home, since the management of the estate
  is in my brother&rsquo;s hands, and my going would cause him no inconvenience.
  Yes, why should I not do as Chichikov has suggested?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Then he added aloud:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Would you come and stay with my brother for a couple of days? Otherwise
  he might refuse me his consent.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;With great pleasure,&rdquo; said Chichikov. &ldquo;Or even for three days.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then here is my hand on it. Let us be off at once.&rdquo; Platon seemed
  suddenly to have come to life again.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Where are you off to?&rdquo; put in their host unexpectedly as he roused
  himself and stared in astonishment at the pair. &ldquo;No, no, my good sirs. I
  have had the wheels removed from your koliaska, Monsieur Chichikov, and
  have sent your horse, Platon Mikhalitch, to a grazing ground fifteen
  versts away. Consequently you must spend the night here, and depart
  to-morrow morning after breakfast.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  What could be done with a man like Pietukh? There was no help for it but
  to remain. In return, the guests were rewarded with a beautiful spring
  evening, for, to spend the time, the host organised a boating expedition
  on the river, and a dozen rowers, with a dozen pairs of oars, conveyed the
  party (to the accompaniment of song) across the smooth surface of the lake
  and up a great river with towering banks. From time to time the boat would
  pass under ropes, stretched across for purposes of fishing, and at each
  turn of the rippling current new vistas unfolded themselves as tier upon
  tier of woodland delighted the eye with a diversity of timber and foliage.
  In unison did the rowers ply their sculls, yet it was though of itself
  that the skiff shot forward, bird-like, over the glassy surface of the
  water; while at intervals the broad-shouldered young oarsman who was
  seated third from the bow would raise, as from a nightingale&rsquo;s throat, the
  opening staves of a boat song, and then be joined by five or six more,
  until the melody had come to pour forth in a volume as free and boundless
  as Russia herself. And Pietukh, too, would give himself a shake, and help
  lustily to support the chorus; and even Chichikov felt acutely conscious
  of the fact that he was a Russian. Only Platon reflected: &ldquo;What is there
  so splendid in these melancholy songs? They do but increase one&rsquo;s
  depression of spirits.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  The journey homeward was made in the gathering dusk. Rhythmically the oars
  smote a surface which no longer reflected the sky, and darkness had fallen
  when they reached the shore, along which lights were twinkling where the
  fisherfolk were boiling live eels for soup. Everything had now wended its
  way homeward for the night; the cattle and poultry had been housed, and
  the herdsmen, standing at the gates of the village cattle-pens, amid the
  trailing dust lately raised by their charges, were awaiting the milk-pails
  and a summons to partake of the eel-broth. Through the dusk came the hum
  of humankind, and the barking of dogs in other and more distant villages;
  while, over all, the moon was rising, and the darkened countryside was
  beginning to glimmer to light again under her beams. What a glorious
  picture! Yet no one thought of admiring it. Instead of galloping over the
  countryside on frisky cobs, Nikolasha and Aleksasha were engaged in
  dreaming of Moscow, with its confectioners&rsquo; shops and the theatres of
  which a cadet, newly arrived on a visit from the capital, had just been
  telling them; while their father had his mind full of how best to stuff
  his guests with yet more food, and Platon was given up to yawning. Only in
  Chichikov was a spice of animation visible. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he reflected, &ldquo;some day
  I, too, will become lord of such a country place.&rdquo; And before his mind&rsquo;s
  eye there arose also a helpmeet and some little Chichikovs.
</p>
<p>
  By the time that supper was finished the party had again over-eaten
  themselves, and when Chichikov entered the room allotted him for the
  night, he lay down upon the bed, and prodded his stomach. &ldquo;It is as tight
  as a drum,&rdquo; he said to himself. &ldquo;Not another titbit of veal could now get
  into it.&rdquo; Also, circumstances had so brought it about that next door to
  him there was situated his host&rsquo;s apartment; and since the intervening
  wall was thin, Chichikov could hear every word that was said there. At the
  present moment the master of the house was engaged in giving the cook
  orders for what, under the guise of an early breakfast, promised to
  constitute a veritable dinner. You should have heard Pietukh&rsquo;s behests!
  They would have excited the appetite of a corpse.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he said, sucking his lips, and drawing a deep breath, &ldquo;in the first
  place, make a pasty in four divisions. Into one of the divisions put the
  sturgeon&rsquo;s cheeks and some viaziga <a href="#linknote-46"
   name="linknoteref-46" id="linknoteref-46"><small>46</small></a>, and into
  another division some buckwheat porridge, young mushrooms and onions,
  sweet milk, calves&rsquo; brains, and anything else that you may find suitable&mdash;anything
  else that you may have got handy. Also, bake the pastry to a nice brown on
  one side, and but lightly on the other. Yes, and, as to the under side,
  bake it so that it will be all juicy and flaky, so that it shall not
  crumble into bits, but melt in the mouth like the softest snow that ever
  you heard of.&rdquo; And as he said this Pietukh fairly smacked his lips.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The devil take him!&rdquo; muttered Chichikov, thrusting his head beneath the
  bedclothes to avoid hearing more. &ldquo;The fellow won&rsquo;t give one a chance to
  sleep.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Nevertheless he heard through the blankets:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And garnish the sturgeon with beetroot, smelts, peppered mushrooms, young
  radishes, carrots, beans, and anything else you like, so as to have plenty
  of trimmings. Yes, and put a lump of ice into the pig&rsquo;s bladder, so as to
  swell it up.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Many other dishes did Pietukh order, and nothing was to be heard but his
  talk of boiling, roasting, and stewing. Finally, just as mention was being
  made of a turkey cock, Chichikov fell asleep.
</p>
<p>
  Next morning the guest&rsquo;s state of repletion had reached the point of
  Platon being unable to mount his horse; wherefore the latter was
  dispatched homeward with one of Pietukh&rsquo;s grooms, and the two guests
  entered Chichikov&rsquo;s koliaska. Even the dog trotted lazily in the rear; for
  he, too, had over-eaten himself.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It has been rather too much of a good thing,&rdquo; remarked Chichikov as the
  vehicle issued from the courtyard.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, and it vexes me to see the fellow never tire of it,&rdquo; replied Platon.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; thought Chichikov to himself, &ldquo;if <i>I</i> had an income of seventy
  thousand roubles, as you have, I&rsquo;d very soon give tiredness one in the
  eye! Take Murazov, the tax-farmer&mdash;he, again, must be worth ten
  millions. What a fortune!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Do you mind where we drive?&rdquo; asked Platon. &ldquo;I should like first to go and
  take leave of my sister and my brother-in-law.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;With pleasure,&rdquo; said Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;My brother-in-law is the leading landowner hereabouts. At the present
  moment he is drawing an income of two hundred thousand roubles from a
  property which, eight years ago, was producing a bare twenty thousand.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Truly a man worthy of the utmost respect! I shall be most interested to
  make his acquaintance. To think of it! And what may his family name be?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Kostanzhoglo.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And his Christian name and patronymic?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Constantine Thedorovitch.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Constantine Thedorovitch Kostanzhoglo. Yes, it will be a most interesting
  event to make his acquaintance. To know such a man must be a whole
  education.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Here Platon set himself to give Selifan some directions as to the way, a
  necessary proceeding in view of the fact that Selifan could hardly
  maintain his seat on the box. Twice Petrushka, too, had fallen headlong,
  and this necessitated being tied to his perch with a piece of rope. &ldquo;What
  a clown!&rdquo; had been Chichikov&rsquo;s only comment.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This is where my brother-in-law&rsquo;s land begins,&rdquo; said Platon.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;They give one a change of view.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  And, indeed, from this point the countryside became planted with timber;
  the rows of trees running as straight as pistol-shots, and having beyond
  them, and on higher ground, a second expanse of forest, newly planted like
  the first; while beyond it, again, loomed a third plantation of older
  trees. Next there succeeded a flat piece of the same nature.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;All this timber,&rdquo; said Platon, &ldquo;has grown up within eight or ten years at
  the most; whereas on another man&rsquo;s land it would have taken twenty to
  attain the same growth.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And how has your brother-in-law effected this?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You must ask him yourself. He is so excellent a husbandman that nothing
  ever fails with him. You see, he knows the soil, and also knows what ought
  to be planted beside what, and what kinds of timber are the best
  neighbourhood for grain. Again, everything on his estate is made to
  perform at least three or four different functions. For instance, he makes
  his timber not only serve as timber, but also serve as a provider of
  moisture and shade to a given stretch of land, and then as a fertiliser
  with its fallen leaves. Consequently, when everywhere else there is
  drought, he still has water, and when everywhere else there has been a
  failure of the harvest, on his lands it will have proved a success. But it
  is a pity that I know so little about it all as to be unable to explain to
  you his many expedients. Folk call him a wizard, for he produces so much.
  Nevertheless, personally I find what he does uninteresting.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Truly an astonishing fellow!&rdquo; reflected Chichikov with a glance at his
  companion. &ldquo;It is sad indeed to see a man so superficial as to be unable
  to explain matters of this kind.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  At length the manor appeared in sight&mdash;an establishment looking
  almost like a town, so numerous were the huts where they stood arranged in
  three tiers, crowned with three churches, and surrounded with huge ricks
  and barns. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; thought Chichikov to himself, &ldquo;one can see what a jewel
  of a landowner lives here.&rdquo; The huts in question were stoutly built and
  the intervening alleys well laid-out; while, wherever a waggon was
  visible, it looked serviceable and more or less new. Also, the local
  peasants bore an intelligent look on their faces, the cattle were of the
  best possible breed, and even the peasants&rsquo; pigs belonged to the porcine
  aristocracy. Clearly there dwelt here peasants who, to quote the song,
  were accustomed to &ldquo;pick up silver by the shovelful.&rdquo; Nor were
  Englishified gardens and parterres and other conceits in evidence, but, on
  the contrary, there ran an open view from the manor house to the farm
  buildings and the workmen&rsquo;s cots, so that, after the old Russian fashion,
  the barin should be able to keep an eye upon all that was going on around
  him. For the same purpose, the mansion was topped with a tall lantern and
  a superstructure&mdash;a device designed, not for ornament, nor for a
  vantage-spot for the contemplation of the view, but for supervision of the
  labourers engaged in distant fields. Lastly, the brisk, active servants
  who received the visitors on the verandah were very different menials from
  the drunken Petrushka, even though they did not wear swallow-tailed coats,
  but only Cossack tchekmenu <a href="#linknote-47" name="linknoteref-47"
   id="linknoteref-47"><small>47</small></a> of blue homespun cloth.
</p>
<p>
  The lady of the house also issued on to the verandah. With her face of the
  freshness of &ldquo;blood and milk&rdquo; and the brightness of God&rsquo;s daylight, she as
  nearly resembled Platon as one pea resembles another, save that, whereas
  he was languid, she was cheerful and full of talk.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good day, brother!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;How glad I am to see you! Constantine is
  not at home, but will be back presently.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Where is he?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Doing business in the village with a party of factors,&rdquo; replied the lady
  as she conducted her guests to the drawing-room.
</p>
<p>
  With no little curiosity did Chichikov gaze at the interior of the mansion
  inhabited by the man who received an annual income of two hundred thousand
  roubles; for he thought to discern therefrom the nature of its proprietor,
  even as from a shell one may deduce the species of oyster or snail which
  has been its tenant, and has left therein its impression. But no such
  conclusions were to be drawn. The rooms were simple, and even bare. Not a
  fresco nor a picture nor a bronze nor a flower nor a china what-not nor a
  book was there to be seen. In short, everything appeared to show that the
  proprietor of this abode spent the greater part of his time, not between
  four walls, but in the field, and that he thought out his plans, not in
  sybaritic fashion by the fireside, nor in an easy chair beside the stove,
  but on the spot where work was actually in progress&mdash;that, in a word,
  where those plans were conceived, there they were put into execution. Nor
  in these rooms could Chichikov detect the least trace of a feminine hand,
  beyond the fact that certain tables and chairs bore drying-boards whereon
  were arranged some sprinklings of flower petals.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What is all this rubbish for?&rdquo; asked Platon.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It is not rubbish,&rdquo; replied the lady of the house. &ldquo;On the contrary, it
  is the best possible remedy for fever. Last year we cured every one of our
  sick peasants with it. Some of the petals I am going to make into an
  ointment, and some into an infusion. You may laugh as much as you like at
  my potting and preserving, yet you yourself will be glad of things of the
  kind when you set out on your travels.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Platon moved to the piano, and began to pick out a note or two.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good Lord, what an ancient instrument!&rdquo; he exclaimed. &ldquo;Are you not
  ashamed of it, sister?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, the truth is that I get no time to practice my music. You see,&rdquo; she
  added to Chichikov, &ldquo;I have an eight-year-old daughter to educate; and to
  hand her over to a foreign governess in order that I may have leisure for
  my own piano-playing&mdash;well, that is a thing which I could never bring
  myself to do.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You have become a wearisome sort of person,&rdquo; commented Platon, and walked
  away to the window. &ldquo;Ah, here comes Constantine,&rdquo; presently he added.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov also glanced out of the window, and saw approaching the verandah
  a brisk, swarthy-complexioned man of about forty, a man clad in a rough
  cloth jacket and a velveteen cap. Evidently he was one of those who care
  little for the niceties of dress. With him, bareheaded, there came a
  couple of men of a somewhat lower station in life, and all three were
  engaged in an animated discussion. One of the barin&rsquo;s two companions was a
  plain peasant, and the other (clad in a blue Siberian smock) a travelling
  factor. The fact that the party halted awhile by the entrance steps made
  it possible to overhear a portion of their conversation from within.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This is what you peasants had better do,&rdquo; the barin was saying. &ldquo;Purchase
  your release from your present master. I will lend you the necessary
  money, and afterwards you can work for me.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, Constantine Thedorovitch,&rdquo; replied the peasant. &ldquo;Why should we do
  that? Remove us just as we are. You will know how to arrange it, for a
  cleverer gentleman than you is nowhere to be found. The misfortune of us
  muzhiks is that we cannot protect ourselves properly. The tavern-keepers
  sell us such liquor that, before a man knows where he is, a glassful of it
  has eaten a hole through his stomach, and made him feel as though he could
  drink a pail of water. Yes, it knocks a man over before he can look
  around. Everywhere temptation lies in wait for the peasant, and he needs
  to be cunning if he is to get through the world at all. In fact, things
  seem to be contrived for nothing but to make us peasants lose our wits,
  even to the tobacco which they sell us. What are folk like ourselves to
  do, Constantine Thedorovitch? I tell you it is terribly difficult for a
  muzhik to look after himself.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Listen to me. This is how things are done here. When I take on a serf, I
  fit him out with a cow and a horse. On the other hand, I demand of him
  thereafter more than is demanded of a peasant anywhere else. That is to
  say, first and foremost I make him work. Whether a peasant be working for
  himself or for me, never do I let him waste time. I myself toil like a
  bullock, and I force my peasants to do the same, for experience has taught
  me that that is the only way to get through life. All the mischief in the
  world comes through lack of employment. Now, do you go and consider the
  matter, and talk it over with your mir <a href="#linknote-48"
   name="linknoteref-48" id="linknoteref-48"><small>48</small></a>.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;We have done that already, Constantine Thedorovitch, and our elders&rsquo;
  opinion is: &lsquo;There is no need for further talk. Every peasant belonging to
  Constantine Thedorovitch is well off, and hasn&rsquo;t to work for nothing. The
  priests of his village, too, are men of good heart, whereas ours have been
  taken away, and there is no one to bury us.&rsquo;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nevertheless, do you go and talk the matter over again.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;We will, barin.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Here the factor who had been walking on the barin&rsquo;s other side put in a
  word.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Constantine Thedorovitch,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I beg of you to do as I have
  requested.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have told you before,&rdquo; replied the barin, &ldquo;that I do not care to play
  the huckster. I am not one of those landowners whom fellows of your sort
  visit on the very day that the interest on a mortgage is due. Ah, I know
  your fraternity thoroughly, and know that you keep lists of all who have
  mortgages to repay. But what is there so clever about that? Any man, if
  you pinch him sufficiently, will surrender you a mortgage at half-price,&mdash;any
  man, that is to say, except myself, who care nothing for your money. Were
  a loan of mine to remain out three years, I should never demand a kopeck
  of interest on it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Quite so, Constantine Thedorovitch,&rdquo; replied the factor. &ldquo;But I am asking
  this of you more for the purpose of establishing us on a business footing
  than because I desire to win your favour. Prey, therefore, accept this
  earnest money of three thousand roubles.&rdquo; And the man drew from his breast
  pocket a dirty roll of bank-notes, which, carelessly receiving,
  Kostanzhoglo thrust, uncounted, into the back pocket of his overcoat.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hm!&rdquo; thought Chichikov. &ldquo;For all he cares, the notes might have been a
  handkerchief.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  When Kostanzhoglo appeared at closer quarters&mdash;that is to say, in the
  doorway of the drawing-room&mdash;he struck Chichikov more than ever with
  the swarthiness of his complexion, the dishevelment of his black, slightly
  grizzled locks, the alertness of his eye, and the impression of fiery
  southern origin which his whole personality diffused. For he was not
  wholly a Russian, nor could he himself say precisely who his forefathers
  had been. Yet, inasmuch as he accounted genealogical research no part of
  the science of estate-management, but a mere superfluity, he looked upon
  himself as, to all intents and purposes, a native of Russia, and the more
  so since the Russian language was the only tongue he knew.
</p>
<p>
  Platon presented Chichikov, and the pair exchanged greetings.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;To get rid of my depression, Constantine,&rdquo; continued Platon, &ldquo;I am
  thinking of accompanying our guest on a tour through a few of the
  provinces.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;An excellent idea,&rdquo; said Kostanzhoglo. &ldquo;But precisely whither?&rdquo; he added,
  turning hospitably to Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;To tell you the truth,&rdquo; replied that personage with an affable
  inclination of the head as he smoothed the arm of his chair with his hand,
  &ldquo;I am travelling less on my own affairs than on the affairs of others.
  That is to say, General Betristchev, an intimate friend, and, I might add,
  a generous benefactor, of mine, has charged me with commissions to some of
  his relatives. Nevertheless, though relatives are relatives, I may say
  that I am travelling on my own account as well, in that, in addition to
  possible benefit to my health, I desire to see the world and the whirligig
  of humanity, which constitute, so to speak, a living book, a second course
  of education.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, there is no harm in looking at other corners of the world besides
  one&rsquo;s own.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You speak truly. There IS no harm in such a proceeding. Thereby one may
  see things which one has not before encountered, one may meet men with
  whom one has not before come in contact. And with some men of that kind a
  conversation is as precious a benefit as has been conferred upon me by the
  present occasion. I come to you, most worthy Constantine Thedorovitch, for
  instruction, and again for instruction, and beg of you to assuage my
  thirst with an exposition of the truth as it is. I hunger for the favour
  of your words as for manna.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But how so? What can <i>I</i> teach you?&rdquo; exclaimed Kostanzhoglo in
  confusion. &ldquo;I myself was given but the plainest of educations.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Nay, most worthy sir, you possess wisdom, and again wisdom. Wisdom only
  can direct the management of a great estate, that can derive a sound
  income from the same, that can acquire wealth of a real, not a fictitious,
  order while also fulfilling the duties of a citizen and thereby earning
  the respect of the Russian public. All this I pray you to teach me.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I tell you what,&rdquo; said Kostanzhoglo, looking meditatively at his guest.
  &ldquo;You had better stay with me for a few days, and during that time I can
  show you how things are managed here, and explain to you everything. Then
  you will see for yourself that no great wisdom is required for the
  purpose.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, certainly you must stay here,&rdquo; put in the lady of the house. Then,
  turning to her brother, she added: &ldquo;And you too must stay. Why should you
  be in such a hurry?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; he replied. &ldquo;But what say YOU, Paul Ivanovitch?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I say the same as you, and with much pleasure,&rdquo; replied Chichikov. &ldquo;But
  also I ought to tell you this: that there is a relative of General
  Betristchev&rsquo;s, a certain Colonel Koshkarev&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, we know him; but he is quite mad.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;As you say, he is mad, and I should not have been intending to visit him,
  were it not that General Betristchev is an intimate friend of mine, as
  well as, I might add, my most generous benefactor.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then,&rdquo; said Kostanzhoglo, &ldquo;do you go and see Colonel Koshkarev NOW. He
  lives less than ten versts from here, and I have a gig already harnessed.
  Go to him at once, and return here for tea.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;An excellent idea!&rdquo; cried Chichikov, and with that he seized his cap.
</p>
<p>
  Half an hour&rsquo;s drive sufficed to bring him to the Colonel&rsquo;s establishment.
  The village attached to the manor was in a state of utter confusion, since
  in every direction building and repairing operations were in progress, and
  the alleys were choked with heaps of lime, bricks, and beams of wood.
  Also, some of the huts were arranged to resemble offices, and superscribed
  in gilt letters &ldquo;Depot for Agricultural Implements,&rdquo; &ldquo;Chief Office of
  Accounts,&rdquo; &ldquo;Estate Works Committee,&rdquo; &ldquo;Normal School for the Education of
  Colonists,&rdquo; and so forth.
</p>
<p>
  Chichikov found the Colonel posted behind a desk and holding a pen between
  his teeth. Without an instant&rsquo;s delay the master of the establishment&mdash;who
  seemed a kindly, approachable man, and accorded to his visitor a very
  civil welcome&mdash;plunged into a recital of the labour which it had cost
  him to bring the property to its present condition of affluence. Then he
  went on to lament the fact that he could not make his peasantry understand
  the incentives to labour which the riches of science and art provide; for
  instance, he had failed to induce his female serfs to wear corsets,
  whereas in Germany, where he had resided for fourteen years, every humble
  miller&rsquo;s daughter could play the piano. None the less, he said, he meant
  to peg away until every peasant on the estate should, as he walked behind
  the plough, indulge in a regular course of reading Franklin&rsquo;s Notes on
  Electricity, Virgil&rsquo;s Georgics, or some work on the chemical properties of
  soil.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good gracious!&rdquo; mentally exclaimed Chichikov. &ldquo;Why, I myself have not had
  time to finish that book by the Duchesse de la Valliere!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Much else the Colonel said. In particular did he aver that, provided the
  Russian peasant could be induced to array himself in German costume,
  science would progress, trade increase, and the Golden Age dawn in Russia.
</p>
<p>
  For a while Chichikov listened with distended eyes. Then he felt
  constrained to intimate that with all that he had nothing to do, seeing
  that his business was merely to acquire a few souls, and thereafter to
  have their purchase confirmed.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;If I understand you aright,&rdquo; said the Colonel, &ldquo;you wish to present a
  Statement of Plea?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, that is so.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then kindly put it into writing, and it shall be forwarded to the Office
  for the Reception of Reports and Returns. Thereafter that Office will
  consider it, and return it to me, who will, in turn, dispatch it to the
  Estate Works Committee, who will, in turn, revise it, and present it to
  the Administrator, who, jointly with the Secretary, will&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Pardon me,&rdquo; expostulated Chichikov, &ldquo;but that procedure will take up a
  great deal of time. Why need I put the matter into writing at all? It is
  simply this. I want a few souls which are&mdash;well, which are, so to
  speak, dead.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very good,&rdquo; commented the Colonel. &ldquo;Do you write down in your Statement
  of Plea that the souls which you desire are, &lsquo;so to speak, dead.&rsquo;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But what would be the use of my doing so? Though the souls are dead, my
  purpose requires that they should be represented as alive.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very good,&rdquo; again commented the Colonel. &ldquo;Do you write down in your
  Statement that &lsquo;it is necessary&rsquo; (or, should you prefer an alternative
  phrase, &lsquo;it is requested,&rsquo; or &lsquo;it is desiderated,&rsquo; or &lsquo;it is prayed,&rsquo;)
  &lsquo;that the souls be represented as alive.&rsquo; At all events, WITHOUT
  documentary process of that kind, the matter cannot possibly be carried
  through. Also, I will appoint a Commissioner to guide you round the
  various Offices.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  And he sounded a bell; whereupon there presented himself a man whom,
  addressing as &ldquo;Secretary,&rdquo; the Colonel instructed to summon the
  &ldquo;Commissioner.&rdquo; The latter, on appearing, was seen to have the air, half
  of a peasant, half of an official.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This man,&rdquo; the Colonel said to Chichikov, &ldquo;will act as your escort.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  What could be done with a lunatic like Koshkarev? In the end, curiosity
  moved Chichikov to accompany the Commissioner. The Committee for the
  Reception of Reports and Returns was discovered to have put up its
  shutters, and to have locked its doors, for the reason that the Director
  of the Committee had been transferred to the newly-formed Committee of
  Estate Management, and his successor had been annexed by the same
  Committee. Next, Chichikov and his escort rapped at the doors of the
  Department of Estate Affairs; but that Department&rsquo;s quarters happened to
  be in a state of repair, and no one could be made to answer the summons
  save a drunken peasant from whom not a word of sense was to be extracted.
  At length the escort felt himself moved to remark:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;There is a deal of foolishness going on here. Fellows like that drunkard
  lead the barin by the nose, and everything is ruled by the Committee of
  Management, which takes men from their proper work, and sets them to do
  any other it likes. Indeed, only through the Committee does ANYTHING get
  done.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  By this time Chichikov felt that he had seen enough; wherefore he returned
  to the Colonel, and informed him that the Office for the Reception of
  Reports and Returns had ceased to exist. At once the Colonel flamed to
  noble rage. Pressing Chichikov&rsquo;s hand in token of gratitude for the
  information which the guest had furnished, he took paper and pen, and
  noted eight searching questions under three separate headings: (1) &ldquo;Why
  has the Committee of Management presumed to issue orders to officials not
  under its jurisdiction?&rdquo; (2) &ldquo;Why has the Chief Manager permitted his
  predecessor, though still in retention of his post, to follow him to
  another Department?&rdquo; and (3) &ldquo;Why has the Committee of Estate Affairs
  suffered the Office for the Reception of Reports and Returns to lapse?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Now for a row!&rdquo; thought Chichikov to himself, and turned to depart; but
  his host stopped him, saying:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I cannot let you go, for, in addition to my honour having become
  involved, it behoves me to show my people how the regular, the organised,
  administration of an estate may be conducted. Herewith I will hand over
  the conduct of your affair to a man who is worth all the rest of the staff
  put together, and has had a university education. Also, the better to lose
  no time, may I humbly beg you to step into my library, where you will find
  notebooks, paper, pens, and everything else that you may require. Of these
  articles pray make full use, for you are a gentleman of letters, and it is
  your and my joint duty to bring enlightenment to all.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  So saying, he ushered his guest into a large room lined from floor to
  ceiling with books and stuffed specimens. The books in question were
  divided into sections&mdash;a section on forestry, a section on
  cattle-breeding, a section on the raising of swine, and a section on
  horticulture, together with special journals of the type circulated merely
  for the purposes of reference, and not for general reading. Perceiving
  that these works were scarcely of a kind calculated to while away an idle
  hour, Chichikov turned to a second bookcase. But to do so was to fall out
  of the frying-pan into the fire, for the contents of the second bookcase
  proved to be works on philosophy, while, in particular, six huge volumes
  confronted him under a label inscribed &ldquo;A Preparatory Course to the
  Province of Thought, with the Theory of Community of Effort, Co-operation,
  and Subsistence, in its Application to a Right Understanding of the
  Organic Principles of a Mutual Division of Social Productivity.&rdquo; Indeed,
  wheresoever Chichikov looked, every page presented to his vision some such
  words as &ldquo;phenomenon,&rdquo; &ldquo;development,&rdquo; &ldquo;abstract,&rdquo; &ldquo;contents,&rdquo; and
  &ldquo;synopsis.&rdquo; &ldquo;This is not the sort of thing for me,&rdquo; he murmured, and
  turned his attention to a third bookcase, which contained books on the
  Arts. Extracting a huge tome in which some by no means reticent
  mythological illustrations were contained, he set himself to examine these
  pictures. They were of the kind which pleases mostly middle-aged bachelors
  and old men who are accustomed to seek in the ballet and similar
  frivolities a further spur to their waning passions. Having concluded his
  examination, Chichikov had just extracted another volume of the same
  species when Colonel Koshkarev returned with a document of some sort and a
  radiant countenance.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Everything has been carried through in due form!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;The man whom
  I mentioned is a genius indeed, and I intend not only to promote him over
  the rest, but also to create for him a special Department. Herewith shall
  you hear what a splendid intellect is his, and how in a few minutes he has
  put the whole affair in order.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;May the Lord be thanked for that!&rdquo; thought Chichikov. Then he settled
  himself while the Colonel read aloud:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;&lsquo;After giving full consideration to the Reference which your Excellency
  has entrusted to me, I have the honour to report as follows:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;&lsquo;(1) In the Statement of Plea presented by one Paul Ivanovitch Chichikov,
  Gentleman, Chevalier, and Collegiate Councillor, there lurks an error, in
  that an oversight has led the Petitioner to apply to Revisional Souls the
  term &ldquo;Dead.&rdquo; Now, from the context it would appear that by this term the
  Petitioner desires to signify Souls Approaching Death rather than Souls
  Actually Deceased: wherefore the term employed betrays such an empirical
  instruction in letters as must, beyond doubt, have been confined to the
  Village School, seeing that in truth the Soul is Deathless.&rsquo;
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The rascal!&rdquo; Koshkarev broke off to exclaim delightedly. &ldquo;He has got you
  there, Monsieur Chichikov. And you will admit that he has a sufficiently
  incisive pen?
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;&lsquo;(2) On this Estate there exist no Unmortgaged Souls whatsoever, whether
  Approaching Death or Otherwise; for the reason that all Souls thereon have
  been pledged not only under a First Deed of Mortgage, but also (for the
  sum of One Hundred and Fifty Roubles per Soul) under a Second,&mdash;the
  village of Gurmailovka alone excepted, in that, in consequence of a Suit
  having been brought against Landowner Priadistchev, and of a caveat having
  been pronounced by the Land Court, and of such caveat having been
  published in No. 42 of the Gazette of Moscow, the said Village has come
  within the Jurisdiction of the Court Above-Mentioned.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why did you not tell me all this before?&rdquo; cried Chichikov furiously. &ldquo;Why
  you have kept me dancing about for nothing?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because it was absolutely necessary that you should view the matter
  through forms of documentary process. This is no jest on my part. The
  inexperienced may see things subconsciously, yet it is imperative that he
  should also see them CONSCIOUSLY.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  But to Chichikov&rsquo;s patience an end had come. Seizing his cap, and casting
  all ceremony to the winds, he fled from the house, and rushed through the
  courtyard. As it happened, the man who had driven him thither had, warned
  by experience, not troubled even to take out the horses, since he knew
  that such a proceeding would have entailed not only the presentation of a
  Statement of Plea for fodder, but also a delay of twenty-four hours until
  the Resolution granting the same should have been passed. Nevertheless the
  Colonel pursued his guest to the gates, and pressed his hand warmly as he
  thanked him for having enabled him (the Colonel) thus to exhibit in
  operation the proper management of an estate. Also, he begged to state
  that, under the circumstances, it was absolutely necessary to keep things
  moving and circulating, since, otherwise, slackness was apt to supervene,
  and the working of the machine to grow rusty and feeble; but that, in
  spite of all, the present occasion had inspired him with a happy idea&mdash;namely,
  the idea of instituting a Committee which should be entitled &ldquo;The
  Committee of Supervision of the Committee of Management,&rdquo; and which should
  have for its function the detection of backsliders among the body first
  mentioned.
</p>
<p>
  It was late when, tired and dissatisfied, Chichikov regained
  Kostanzhoglo&rsquo;s mansion. Indeed, the candles had long been lit.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What has delayed you?&rdquo; asked the master of the house as Chichikov entered
  the drawing-room.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, what has kept you and the Colonel so long in conversation together?&rdquo;
   added Platon.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This&mdash;the fact that never in my life have I come across such an
  imbecile,&rdquo; was Chichikov&rsquo;s reply.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Never mind,&rdquo; said Kostanzhoglo. &ldquo;Koshkarev is a most reassuring
  phenomenon. He is necessary in that in him we see expressed in caricature
  all the more crying follies of our intellectuals&mdash;of the
  intellectuals who, without first troubling to make themselves acquainted
  with their own country, borrow silliness from abroad. Yet that is how
  certain of our landowners are now carrying on. They have set up &lsquo;offices&rsquo;
  and factories and schools and &lsquo;commissions,&rsquo; and the devil knows what else
  besides. A fine lot of wiseacres! After the French War in 1812 they had to
  reconstruct their affairs: and see how they have done it! Yet so much
  worse have they done it than a Frenchman would have done that any fool of
  a Peter Petrovitch Pietukh now ranks as a good landowner!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But he has mortgaged the whole of his estate?&rdquo; remarked Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, nowadays everything is being mortgaged, or is going to be.&rdquo; This
  said, Kostanzhoglo&rsquo;s temper rose still further. &ldquo;Out upon your factories
  of hats and candles!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Out upon procuring candle-makers from
  London, and then turning landowners into hucksters! To think of a Russian
  pomiestchik <a href="#linknote-49" name="linknoteref-49"
   id="linknoteref-49"><small>49</small></a>, a member of the noblest of
  callings, conducting workshops and cotton mills! Why, it is for the
  wenches of towns to handle looms for muslin and lace.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But you yourself maintain workshops?&rdquo; remarked Platon.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I do; but who established them? They established themselves. For
  instance, wool had accumulated, and since I had nowhere to store it, I
  began to weave it into cloth&mdash;but, mark you, only into good, plain
  cloth of which I can dispose at a cheap rate in the local markets, and
  which is needed by peasants, including my own. Again, for six years on end
  did the fish factories keep dumping their offal on my bank of the river;
  wherefore, at last, as there was nothing to be done with it, I took to
  boiling it into glue, and cleared forty thousand roubles by the process.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The devil!&rdquo; thought Chichikov to himself as he stared at his host. &ldquo;What
  a fist this man has for making money!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Another reason why I started those factories,&rdquo; continued Kostanzhoglo,
  &ldquo;is that they might give employment to many peasants who would otherwise
  have starved. You see, the year happened to have been a lean one&mdash;thanks
  to those same industry-mongering landowners, in that they had neglected to
  sow their crops; and now my factories keep growing at the rate of a
  factory a year, owing to the circumstance that such quantities of remnants
  and cuttings become so accumulated that, if a man looks carefully to his
  management, he will find every sort of rubbish to be capable of bringing
  in a return&mdash;yes, to the point of his having to reject money on the
  plea that he has no need of it. Yet I do not find that to do all this I
  require to build a mansion with facades and pillars!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Marvellous!&rdquo; exclaimed Chichikov. &ldquo;Beyond all things does it surprise me
  that refuse can be so utilised.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, and that is what can be done by SIMPLE methods. But nowadays every
  one is a mechanic, and wants to open that money chest with an instrument
  instead of simply. For that purpose he hies him to England. Yes, THAT is
  the thing to do. What folly!&rdquo; Kostanzhoglo spat and added: &ldquo;Yet when he
  returns from abroad he is a hundred times more ignorant than when he
  went.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, Constantine,&rdquo; put in his wife anxiously, &ldquo;you know how bad for you it
  is to talk like this.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, but how am I to help losing my temper? The thing touches me too
  closely, it vexes me too deeply to think that the Russian character should
  be degenerating. For in that character there has dawned a sort of
  Quixotism which never used to be there. Yes, no sooner does a man get a
  little education into his head than he becomes a Don Quixote, and
  establishes schools on his estate such as even a madman would never have
  dreamed of. And from that school there issues a workman who is good for
  nothing, whether in the country or in the town&mdash;a fellow who drinks
  and is for ever standing on his dignity. Yet still our landowners keep
  taking to philanthropy, to converting themselves into philanthropic
  knights-errant, and spending millions upon senseless hospitals and
  institutions, and so ruining themselves and turning their families adrift.
  Yes, that is all that comes of philanthropy.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Chichikov&rsquo;s business had nothing to do with the spread of enlightenment,
  he was but seeking an opportunity to inquire further concerning the
  putting of refuse to lucrative uses; but Kostanzhoglo would not let him
  get a word in edgeways, so irresistibly did the flow of sarcastic comment
  pour from the speaker&rsquo;s lips.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; went on Kostanzhoglo, &ldquo;folk are always scheming to educate the
  peasant. But first make him well-off and a good farmer. THEN he will
  educate himself fast enough. As things are now, the world has grown stupid
  to a degree that passes belief. Look at the stuff our present-day
  scribblers write! Let any sort of a book be published, and at once you
  will see every one making a rush for it. Similarly will you find folk
  saying: &lsquo;The peasant leads an over-simple life. He ought to be
  familiarised with luxuries, and so led to yearn for things above his
  station.&rsquo; And the result of such luxuries will be that the peasant will
  become a rag rather than a man, and suffer from the devil only knows what
  diseases, until there will remain in the land not a boy of eighteen who
  will not have experienced the whole gamut of them, and found himself left
  with not a tooth in his jaws or a hair on his pate. Yes, that is what will
  come of infecting the peasant with such rubbish. But, thank God, there is
  still one healthy class left to us&mdash;a class which has never taken up
  with the &lsquo;advantages&rsquo; of which I speak. For that we ought to be grateful.
  And since, even yet, the Russian agriculturist remains the most
  respect-worthy man in the land, why should he be touched? Would to God
  every one were an agriculturist!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you believe agriculture to be the most profitable of occupations?&rdquo;
   said Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The best, at all events&mdash;if not the most profitable. &lsquo;In the sweat
  of thy brow shalt thou till the land.&rsquo; To quote that requires no great
  wisdom, for the experience of ages has shown us that, in the agricultural
  calling, man has ever remained more moral, more pure, more noble than in
  any other. Of course I do not mean to imply that no other calling ought to
  be practised: simply that the calling in question lies at the root of all
  the rest. However much factories may be established privately or by the
  law, there will still lie ready to man&rsquo;s hand all that he needs&mdash;he
  will still require none of those amenities which are sapping the vitality
  of our present-day folk, nor any of those industrial establishments which
  make their profit, and keep themselves going, by causing foolish measures
  to be adopted which, in the end, are bound to deprave and corrupt our
  unfortunate masses. I myself am determined never to establish any
  manufacture, however profitable, which will give rise to a demand for
  &lsquo;higher things,&rsquo; such as sugar and tobacco&mdash;no not if I lose a
  million by my refusing to do so. If corruption MUST overtake the MIR, it
  shall not be through my hands. And I think that God will justify me in my
  resolve. Twenty years have I lived among the common folk, and I know what
  will inevitably come of such things.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But what surprises me most,&rdquo; persisted Chichikov, &ldquo;is that from refuse it
  should be possible, with good management, to make such an immensity of
  profit.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And as for political economy,&rdquo; continued Kostanzhoglo, without noticing
  him, and with his face charged with bilious sarcasm, &ldquo;&mdash;as for
  political economy, it is a fine thing indeed. Just one fool sitting on
  another fool&rsquo;s back, and flogging him along, even though the rider can see
  no further than his own nose! Yet into the saddle will that fool climb&mdash;spectacles
  and all! Oh, the folly, the folly of such things!&rdquo; And the speaker spat
  derisively.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That may be true,&rdquo; said his wife. &ldquo;Yet you must not get angry about it.
  Surely one can speak on such subjects without losing one&rsquo;s temper?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;As I listen to you, most worthy Constantine Thedorovitch,&rdquo; Chichikov
  hastened to remark, &ldquo;it becomes plain to me that you have penetrated into
  the meaning of life, and laid your finger upon the essential root of the
  matter. Yet supposing, for a moment, we leave the affairs of humanity in
  general, and turn our attention to a purely individual affair, might I ask
  you how, in the case of a man becoming a landowner, and having a mind to
  grow wealthy as quickly as possible (in order that he may fulfil his
  bounden obligations as a citizen), he can best set about it?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How he can best set about growing wealthy?&rdquo; repeated Kostanzhoglo. &ldquo;Why,&mdash;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let us go to supper,&rdquo; interrupted the lady of the house, rising from her
  chair, and moving towards the centre of the room, where she wrapped her
  shivering young form in a shawl. Chichikov sprang up with the alacrity of
  a military man, offered her his arm, and escorted her, as on parade, to
  the dining-room, where awaiting them there was the soup-toureen. From it
  the lid had just been removed, and the room was redolent of the fragrant
  odour of early spring roots and herbs. The company took their seats, and
  at once the servants placed the remainder of the dishes (under covers)
  upon the table and withdrew, for Kostanzhoglo hated to have servants
  listening to their employers&rsquo; conversation, and objected still more to
  their staring at him all the while that he was eating.
</p>
<p>
  When the soup had been consumed, and glasses of an excellent vintage
  resembling Hungarian wine had been poured out, Chichikov said to his host:
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Most worthy sir, allow me once more to direct your attention to the
  subject of which we were speaking at the point when the conversation
  became interrupted. You will remember that I was asking you how best a man
  can set about, proceed in, the matter of growing...&rdquo;
 </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       [Here from the original two pages are missing.]
</pre>
<p>
  ... &ldquo;A property for which, had he asked forty thousand, I should still
  have demanded a reduction.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hm!&rdquo; thought Chichikov; then added aloud: &ldquo;But why do you not purchase it
  yourself?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Because to everything there must be assigned a limit. Already my property
  keeps me sufficiently employed. Moreover, I should cause our local
  dvoriane to begin crying out in chorus that I am exploiting their
  extremities, their ruined position, for the purpose of acquiring land for
  under its value. Of that I am weary.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How readily folk speak evil!&rdquo; exclaimed Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, and the amount of evil-speaking in our province surpasses belief.
  Never will you hear my name mentioned without my being called also a miser
  and a usurer of the worst possible sort; whereas my accusers justify
  themselves in everything, and say that, &lsquo;though we have wasted our money,
  we have started a demand for the higher amenities of life, and therefore
  encouraged industry with our wastefulness, a far better way of doing
  things than that practised by Kostanzhoglo, who lives like a pig.&rsquo;&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Would <i>I</i> could live in your &lsquo;piggish&rsquo; fashion!&rdquo; ejaculated
  Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And so forth, and so forth. Yet what are the &lsquo;higher amenities of life&rsquo;?
  What good can they do to any one? Even if a landowner of the day sets up a
  library, he never looks at a single book in it, but soon relapses into
  card-playing&mdash;the usual pursuit. Yet folk call me names simply
  because I do not waste my means upon the giving of dinners! One reason why
  I do not give such dinners is that they weary me; and another reason is
  that I am not used to them. But come you to my house for the purpose of
  taking pot luck, and I shall be delighted to see you. Also, folk foolishly
  say that I lend money on interest; whereas the truth is that if you should
  come to me when you are really in need, and should explain to me openly
  how you propose to employ my money, and I should perceive that you are
  purposing to use that money wisely, and that you are really likely to
  profit thereby&mdash;well, in that case you would find me ready to lend
  you all that you might ask without interest at all.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That is a thing which it is well to know,&rdquo; reflected Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; repeated Kostanzhoglo, &ldquo;under those circumstances I should never
  refuse you my assistance. But I do object to throwing my money to the
  winds. Pardon me for expressing myself so plainly. To think of lending
  money to a man who is merely devising a dinner for his mistress, or
  planning to furnish his house like a lunatic, or thinking of taking his
  paramour to a masked ball or a jubilee in honour of some one who had
  better never have been born!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  And, spitting, he came near to venting some expression which would
  scarcely have been becoming in the presence of his wife. Over his face the
  dark shadow of hypochondria had cast a cloud, and furrows had formed on
  his brow and temples, and his every gesture bespoke the influence of a
  hot, nervous rancour.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But allow me once more to direct your attention to the subject of our
  recently interrupted conversation,&rdquo; persisted Chichikov as he sipped a
  glass of excellent raspberry wine. &ldquo;That is to say, supposing I were to
  acquire the property which you have been good enough to bring to my
  notice, how long would it take me to grow rich?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That would depend on yourself,&rdquo; replied Kostanzhoglo with grim abruptness
  and evident ill-humour. &ldquo;You might either grow rich quickly or you might
  never grow rich at all. If you made up your mind to grow rich, sooner or
  later you would find yourself a wealthy man.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Indeed!&rdquo; ejaculated Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; replied Kostanzhoglo, as sharply as though he were angry with
  Chichikov. &ldquo;You would merely need to be fond of work: otherwise you would
  effect nothing. The main thing is to like looking after your property.
  Believe me, you would never grow weary of doing so. People would have it
  that life in the country is dull; whereas, if I were to spend a single day
  as it is spent by some folk, with their stupid clubs and their restaurants
  and their theatres, I should die of ennui. The fools, the idiots, the
  generations of blind dullards! But a landowner never finds the days
  wearisome&mdash;he has not the time. In his life not a moment remains
  unoccupied; it is full to the brim. And with it all goes an endless
  variety of occupations. And what occupations! Occupations which genuinely
  uplift the soul, seeing that the landowner walks with nature and the
  seasons of the year, and takes part in, and is intimate with, everything
  which is evolved by creation. For let us look at the round of the year&rsquo;s
  labours. Even before spring has arrived there will have begun a general
  watching and a waiting for it, and a preparing for sowing, and an
  apportioning of crops, and a measuring of seed grain by byres, and drying
  of seed, and a dividing of the workers into teams. For everything needs to
  be examined beforehand, and calculations must be made at the very start.
  And as soon as ever the ice shall have melted, and the rivers be flowing,
  and the land have dried sufficiently to be workable, the spade will begin
  its task in kitchen and flower garden, and the plough and the harrow their
  tasks in the field; until everywhere there will be tilling and sowing and
  planting. And do you understand what the sum of that labour will mean? It
  will mean that the harvest is being sown, that the welfare of the world is
  being sown, that the food of millions is being put into the earth. And
  thereafter will come summer, the season of reaping, endless reaping; for
  suddenly the crops will have ripened, and rye-sheaf will be lying heaped
  upon rye-sheaf, with, elsewhere, stocks of barley, and of oats, and of
  wheat. And everything will be teeming with life, and not a moment will
  there need to be lost, seeing that, had you even twenty eyes, you would
  have need for them all. And after the harvest festivities there will be
  grain to be carted to byre or stacked in ricks, and stores to be prepared
  for the winter, and storehouses and kilns and cattle-sheds to be cleaned
  for the same purpose, and the women to be assigned their tasks, and the
  totals of everything to be calculated, so that one may see the value of
  what has been done. And lastly will come winter, when in every
  threshing-floor the flail will be working, and the grain, when threshed,
  will need to be carried from barn to binn, and the mills require to be
  seen to, and the estate factories to be inspected, and the workmen&rsquo;s huts
  to be visited for the purpose of ascertaining how the muzhik is faring
  (for, given a carpenter who is clever with his tools, I, for one, am only
  too glad to spend an hour or two in his company, so cheering to me is
  labour). And if, in addition, one discerns the end to which everything is
  moving, and the manner in which the things of earth are everywhere
  multiplying and multiplying, and bringing forth more and more fruit to
  one&rsquo;s profiting, I cannot adequately express what takes place in a man&rsquo;s
  soul. And that, not because of the growth in his wealth&mdash;money is
  money and no more&mdash;but because he will feel that everything is the
  work of his own hands, and that he has been the cause of everything, and
  its creator, and that from him, as from a magician, there has flowed
  bounty and goodness for all. In what other calling will you find such
  delights in prospect?&rdquo; As he spoke, Kostanzhoglo raised his face, and it
  became clear that the wrinkles had fled from it, and that, like the Tsar
  on the solemn day of his crowning, Kostanzhoglo&rsquo;s whole form was diffusing
  light, and his features had in them a gentle radiance. &ldquo;In all the world,&rdquo;
   he repeated, &ldquo;you will find no joys like these, for herein man imitates
  the God who projected creation as the supreme happiness, and now demands
  of man that he, too, should act as the creator of prosperity. Yet there
  are folk who call such functions tedious!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Kostanzhoglo&rsquo;s mellifluous periods fell upon Chichikov&rsquo;s ear like the
  notes of a bird of paradise. From time to time he gulped, and his softened
  eyes expressed the pleasure which it gave him to listen.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Constantine, it is time to leave the table,&rdquo; said the lady of the house,
  rising from her seat. Every one followed her example, and Chichikov once
  again acted as his hostess&rsquo;s escort&mdash;although with less dexterity of
  deportment than before, owing to the fact that this time his thoughts were
  occupied with more essential matters of procedure.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;In spite of what you say,&rdquo; remarked Platon as he walked behind the pair,
  &ldquo;I, for my part, find these things wearisome.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  But the master of the house paid no attention to his remark, for he was
  reflecting that his guest was no fool, but a man of serious thought and
  speech who did not take things lightly. And, with the thought,
  Kostanzhoglo grew lighter in soul, as though he had warmed himself with
  his own words, and were exulting in the fact that he had found some one
  capable of listening to good advice.
</p>
<p>
  When they had settled themselves in the cosy, candle-lighted drawing-room,
  with its balcony and the glass door opening out into the garden&mdash;a
  door through which the stars could be seen glittering amid the slumbering
  tops of the trees&mdash;Chichikov felt more comfortable than he had done
  for many a day past. It was as though, after long journeying, his own
  roof-tree had received him once more&mdash;had received him when his quest
  had been accomplished, when all that he wished for had been gained, when
  his travelling-staff had been laid aside with the words &ldquo;It is finished.&rdquo;
   And of this seductive frame of mind the true source had been the eloquent
  discourse of his hospitable host. Yes, for every man there exist certain
  things which, instantly that they are said, seem to touch him more
  closely, more intimately, than anything has done before. Nor is it an
  uncommon occurrence that in the most unexpected fashion, and in the most
  retired of retreats, one will suddenly come face to face with a man whose
  burning periods will lead one to forget oneself and the tracklessness of
  the route and the discomfort of one&rsquo;s nightly halting-places, and the
  futility of crazes and the falseness of tricks by which one human being
  deceives another. And at once there will become engraven upon one&rsquo;s memory&mdash;vividly,
  and for all time&mdash;the evening thus spent. And of that evening one&rsquo;s
  remembrance will hold true, both as to who was present, and where each
  such person sat, and what he or she was wearing, and what the walls and
  the stove and other trifling features of the room looked like.
</p>
<p>
  In the same way did Chichikov note each detail that evening&mdash;both the
  appointments of the agreeable, but not luxuriously furnished, room, and
  the good-humoured expression which reigned on the face of the thoughtful
  host, and the design of the curtains, and the amber-mounted pipe smoked by
  Platon, and the way in which he kept puffing smoke into the fat jowl of
  the dog Yarb, and the sneeze which, on each such occasion, Yarb vented,
  and the laughter of the pleasant-faced hostess (though always followed by
  the words &ldquo;Pray do not tease him any more&rdquo;) and the cheerful candle-light,
  and the cricket chirping in a corner, and the glass door, and the spring
  night which, laying its elbows upon the tree-tops, and spangled with
  stars, and vocal with the nightingales which were pouring forth warbled
  ditties from the recesses of the foliage, kept glancing through the door,
  and regarding the company within.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How it delights me to hear your words, good Constantine Thedorovitch!&rdquo;
   said Chichikov. &ldquo;Indeed, nowhere in Russia have I met with a man of equal
  intellect.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Kostanzhoglo smiled, while realising that the compliment was scarcely
  deserved.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;If you want a man of GENUINE intellect,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I can tell you of one.
  He is a man whose boot soles are worth more than my whole body.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who may he be?&rdquo; asked Chichikov in astonishment.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Murazov, our local Commissioner of Taxes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah! I have heard of him before,&rdquo; remarked Chichikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He is a man who, were he not the director of an estate, might well be a
  director of the Empire. And were the Empire under my direction, I should
  at once appoint him my Minister of Finance.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have heard tales beyond belief concerning him&mdash;for instance, that
  he has acquired ten million roubles.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ten? More than forty. Soon half Russia will be in his hands.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t say so?&rdquo; cried Chichikov in amazement.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, certainly. The man who has only a hundred thousand roubles to work
  with grows rich but slowly, whereas he who has millions at his disposal
  can operate over a greater radius, and so back whatsoever he undertakes
  with twice or thrice the money which can be brought against him.
  Consequently his field becomes so spacious that he ends by having no
  rivals. Yes, no one can compete with him, and, whatsoever price he may fix
  for a given commodity, at that price it will have to remain, nor will any
  man be able to outbid it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;My God!&rdquo; muttered Chichikov, crossing himself, and staring at
  Kostanzhoglo with his breath catching in his throat. &ldquo;The mind cannot
  grasp it&mdash;it petrifies one&rsquo;s thoughts with awe. You see folk
  marvelling at what Science has achieved in the matter of investigating the
  habits of cowbugs, but to me it is a far more marvellous thing that in the
  hands of a single mortal there can become accumulated such gigantic sums
  of money. But may I ask whether the great fortune of which you speak has
  been acquired through honest means?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes; through means of the most irreproachable kind&mdash;through the most
  honourable of methods.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yet so improbable does it seem that I can scarcely believe it. Thousands
  I could understand, but millions&mdash;!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;On the contrary, to make thousands honestly is a far more difficult
  matter than to make millions. Millions are easily come by, for a
  millionaire has no need to resort to crooked ways; the way lies straight
  before him, and he needs but to annex whatsoever he comes across. No rival
  will spring up to oppose him, for no rival will be sufficiently strong,
  and since the millionaire can operate over an extensive radius, he can
  bring (as I have said) two or three roubles to bear upon any one else&rsquo;s
  one. Consequently, what interest will he derive from a thousand roubles?
  Why, ten or twenty per cent. at the least.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And it is beyond measure marvellous that the whole should have started
  from a single kopeck.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Had it started otherwise, the thing could never have been done at all.
  Such is the normal course. He who is born with thousands, and is brought
  up to thousands, will never acquire a single kopeck more, for he will have
  been set up with the amenities of life in advance, and so never come to
  stand in need of anything. It is necessary to begin from the beginning
  rather than from the middle; from a kopeck rather than from a rouble; from
  the bottom rather than from the top. For only thus will a man get to know
  the men and conditions among which his career will have to be carved. That
  is to say, through encountering the rough and the tumble of life, and
  through learning that every kopeck has to be beaten out with a
  three-kopeck nail, and through worsting knave after knave, he will acquire
  such a degree of perspicuity and wariness that he will err in nothing
  which he may tackle, and never come to ruin. Believe me, it is so. The
  beginning, and not the middle, is the right starting point. No one who
  comes to me and says, &lsquo;Give me a hundred thousand roubles, and I will grow
  rich in no time,&rsquo; do I believe, for he is likely to meet with failure
  rather than with the success of which he is so assured. &lsquo;Tis with a
  kopeck, and with a kopeck only, that a man must begin.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;If that is so, <i>I</i> shall grow rich,&rdquo; said Chichikov, involuntarily
  remembering the dead souls. &ldquo;For of a surety <i>I</i> began with nothing.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Constantine, pray allow Paul Ivanovitch to retire to rest,&rdquo; put in the
  lady of the house. &ldquo;It is high time, and I am sure you have talked
  enough.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, beyond a doubt you will grow rich,&rdquo; continued Kostanzhoglo, without
  heeding his wife. &ldquo;For towards you there will run rivers and rivers of
  gold, until you will not know what to do with all your gains.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  As though spellbound, Chichikov sat in an aureate world of ever-growing
  dreams and fantasies. All his thoughts were in a whirl, and on a carpet of
  future wealth his tumultuous imagination was weaving golden patterns,
  while ever in his ears were ringing the words, &ldquo;towards you there will run
  rivers and rivers of gold.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Really, Constantine, DO allow Paul Ivanovitch to go to bed.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What on earth is the matter?&rdquo; retorted the master of the household
  testily. &ldquo;Pray go yourself if you wish to.&rdquo; Then he stopped short, for the
  snoring of Platon was filling the whole room, and also&mdash;outrivalling
  it&mdash;that of the dog Yarb. This caused Kostanzhoglo to realise that
  bedtime really had arrived; wherefore, after he had shaken Platon out of
  his slumbers, and bidden Chichikov good night, all dispersed to their
  several chambers, and became plunged in sleep.
</p>
<p>
  All, that is to say, except Chichikov, whose thoughts remained wakeful,
  and who kept wondering and wondering how best he could become the owner,
  not of a fictitious, but of a real, estate. The conversation with his host
  had made everything clear, had made the possibility of his acquiring
  riches manifest, had made the difficult art of estate management at once
  easy and understandable; until it would seem as though particularly was
  his nature adapted for mastering the art in question. All that he would
  need to do would be to mortgage the dead souls, and then to set up a
  genuine establishment. Already he saw himself acting and administering as
  Kostanzhoglo had advised him&mdash;energetically, and through personal
  oversight, and undertaking nothing new until the old had been thoroughly
  learned, and viewing everything with his own eyes, and making himself
  familiar with each member of his peasantry, and abjuring all
  superfluities, and giving himself up to hard work and husbandry. Yes,
  already could he taste the pleasure which would be his when he had built
  up a complete industrial organisation, and the springs of the industrial
  machine were in vigorous working order, and each had become able to
  reinforce the other. Labour should be kept in active operation, and, even
  as, in a mill, flour comes flowing from grain, so should cash, and yet
  more cash, come flowing from every atom of refuse and remnant. And all the
  while he could see before him the landowner who was one of the leading men
  in Russia, and for whom he had conceived such an unbounded respect.
  Hitherto only for rank or for opulence had Chichikov respected a man&mdash;never
  for mere intellectual power; but now he made a first exception in favour
  of Kostanzhoglo, seeing that he felt that nothing undertaken by his host
  could possibly come to naught. And another project which was occupying
  Chichikov&rsquo;s mind was the project of purchasing the estate of a certain
  landowner named Khlobuev. Already Chichikov had at his disposal ten
  thousand roubles, and a further fifteen thousand he would try and borrow
  of Kostanzhoglo (seeing that the latter had himself said that he was
  prepared to help any one who really desired to grow rich); while, as for
  the remainder, he would either raise the sum by mortgaging the estate or
  force Khlobuev to wait for it&mdash;just to tell him to resort to the
  courts if such might be his pleasure.
</p>
<p>
  Long did our hero ponder the scheme; until at length the slumber which
  had, these four hours past, been holding the rest of the household in its
  embraces enfolded also Chichikov, and he sank into oblivion.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0015" id="link2HCH0015">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
